Intel Recommends Public Policy Principles for Artificial Intelligence - Intel Community Search Browse Support Community About Developer Software Forums Developer Software Forums Software Development Tools Toolkits & SDKs Software Development Topics Software Development Technologies oneAPI Registration , Download , Licensing and Installation GPU Compute Software Intel® Tiber Developer Cloud Software Archive Edge Software Catalog Product Support Forums Product Support Forums FPGA Memory & Storage Visual Computing Embedded Products Graphics Processors Wireless Ethernet Products Server Products Intel vPro® Platform Intel® Enpirion® Power Solutions Intel® Unison™ App Intel® QuickAssist Technology ( Intel® QAT ) Intel® Trusted Execution Technology ( Intel® TXT ) Thunderbolt™ Share Intel® Gaudi® AI Accelerator Gaming Forums Gaming Forums Intel® ARC™ Graphics Gaming on Intel® Processors with Intel® Graphics Developing Games on Intel Graphics Blogs Blogs @ Intel Products and Solutions Tech Innovation Thought Leadership Intel Foundry Private Forums Private Forums Intel oneAPI Toolkits Private Forums Intel AI Software - Private Forums Intel® Connectivity Research Program ( Private ) Intel-Habana Gaudi Technology Forum HARP ( Private Forum ) Neural Object Cloning Beta Policy @ Intel A place to exchange ideas and perspectives , promoting a thriving innovation economy through public policy Success ! Subscription added . Success ! Subscription removed . Sorry , you must verify to complete this action . Please click the verification link in your email . You may re-send via your profile . Intel Community Blogs @ Intel Policy @ Intel Intel Recommends Public Policy Principles for Artificial Intelligence 650 Discussions Intel Recommends Public Policy Principles for Artificial Intelligence Subscribe Article Options Subscribe to RSS Feed Mark as New Mark as Read Bookmark Subscribe Printer Friendly Page Report Inappropriate Content Naveen_Rao Employee ‎10-18-2017 12:00 AM 0 0 2,661 By Naveen Rao , Vice President and General Manager , Artificial Intelligence Products GroupThe computational advances of the past few years have enabled a new era of innovation – one in which machines can analyze vast amounts of data and find useful insights in that data . This is Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) . With the proliferation of large data sets , computers can now solve problems that previously required human intervention . Dr. Naveen Rao , Intel VPAs with previous revolutions in industrial development , the possibilities for applying AI to improve societies and advance human welfare are substantial . Intel is working across industry , government , and civil society to make these advancements in consideration of the global technological , economic , social , and cultural contexts in which they will be leveraged . One of these contexts is a public policy environment that considers the tremendous complexity behind implementing technology that makes decisions based on human-defined datasets . As important as where AI will get used is how AI will get used ; a public policy conversation is necessary now as we work to develop new methods for integrating AI capabilities into the fabric of society.Today , we ’ re proud to release Intel ’ s first AI Public Policy white paper that offers a set of public policy principles to further discussions and debate among technologists , academics , data scientists , policymakers , and the public . It is our vision that policymakers around the world can integrate these principles into workable policy frameworks . Foster Innovation and Open Development – To better understand just how impactful AI can be in our lives and continue to explore the spectrum of applications , policy should encourage investment in R & D in AI sectors . Governments should support the controlled testing of artificially intelligent systems to help industry , academia , and other stakeholders improve our systems . Create New Human Employment Opportunities and Protect People ’ s Welfare – AI will change the way many of us work . Public policy in support of adding skills to the workforce and promoting employment across sectors should enhance our workforce while also protecting people ’ s welfare . Liberate Data Responsibly – AI is powered by access to data . While maintaining security and data privacy , machine learning algorithms improve by absorbing more data over time ; data acquisition is imperative to achieving more enhanced model development and training . Keeping data moving will help machine learning and deep learning reach its full potential . Rethink Privacy – Many privacy frameworks like The Fair Information Practice Principles and Privacy by Design have withstood the test of time and the evolution of new technology . But with major technological advancements , we have had to “ rethink ” how these models apply in the new environment . Require Accountability for Ethical Design and Implementation – The social implications of computing have grown and will continue to expand as more people have access to smart systems . Policies should work to identify and mitigate discrimination in algorithms and encourage diversity in design thinking.Additionally , Intel is excited to announce the launch of a Blog Series dedicated to exploring the vast scope of AI implementations across different industries – from cybersecurity to agriculture and everything in between . As October is Cybersecurity Awareness Month in the United States , Europe and Australia , the first entry will feature an examination of AI ’ s implementations in cybersecurity to better predict and prevent cyberattacks and security breaches . Sign up to receive this and future posts at Intel ’ s policy blog site.Naveen RaoIntel VPGM , Artificial Intelligence ProductsLink to Intel AI Public Policy white paper : http : //intel.ly/aipublicpolicyPolicy Blog : http : //blogs.intel.com/policy/Learn more about AI at Intel : IntelNervana.comIntel , the Intel logo and Intel Nervana are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries in the U.S. and/or other countries . * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.© Intel Corporation Tags ( 13 ) Tags : Artificial IntelligenceBig Datadatadata privacyData Privacy DayemploymentethicsGovernmentInnovationPolicyPrivacySecuritywhite paper 0 Kudos You must be a registered user to add a comment . If you 've already registered , sign in . Otherwise , register and sign in . Comment Community support is provided Monday to Friday . Other contact methods are available here . Intel does not verify all solutions , including but not limited to any file transfers that may appear in this community . Accordingly , Intel disclaims all express and implied warranties , including without limitation , the implied warranties of merchantability , fitness for a particular purpose , and non-infringement , as well as any warranty arising from course of performance , course of dealing , or usage in trade . For more complete information about compiler optimizations , see our Optimization Notice . ©Intel Corporation Terms of Use * Trademarks Cookies Privacy Supply Chain Transparency Site Map
