English - KI Testing & Auditing Zum Hauptinhalt springenAktuellesVeranstaltungenÜber das ProjektTeamVeröffentlichungenKontaktEnglish ( current ) ExamAI – Testing and Auditing of AI systems Developing recommendations for action to improve the auditability and controllability of AI-based systems based on use cases in the fields of collaborative industrial production and individual work careers Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) and AI methods are increasingly being used in workplaces : AI-based matching systems or automized personality assessments can be used in human resources departments and intelligent collaborative robots and automated guided vehicles are used in production or logistics environments . Hence , the reliability , trustworthiness , safety and fairness of such systems needs to be tested and certified.The research project `` ExamAI - AI Testing & Auditing '' ( March 2020–November 2021 ) , coordinated by the German Informatics Society ( GI ) , investigated the question of effective control and test procedures for AI systems . The interdisciplinary team comprised experts of the University of Saarland , the Technical University of Kaiserslautern , the Fraunhofer Institute IESE and the Stiftung Neue Verantwortung.Within the application areas `` human-machine cooperation in industrial production '' and `` AI systems in human resources and talent management and in recruiting '' , the team looked at eleven use cases , which were identified at the beginning of the project ( work package 1 ) . The use cases deal , for example , with the misbehaviour of intelligent cobots ( collaborative robots ) and automated guided vehicles or with AI-based background checks of applicants and automated assessments of CVs . In addition to the main focus on possibilities for testing , auditing and certifying AI systems ( work packages 4 and 5 ) , the project also focused on the current state of standardisation in the field of AI ( work package 2 ) and on the legal framework conditions that apply to the use of AI systems ( work package 3 ) . At a final stage the European proposal for an AI Act was examined in particular with regard to its legal requirements for developers and users . At the end of the project , policy recommendations were discussed in interdisciplinary expert workshops and have been published in two policy briefs ( work package 6 ) .The project is funded by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs ‘ Policy Lab Digital , Work & Society as part of the Observatory for Artificial Intelligence in Work and Society ( AI Observatory ) project . The Policy Lab Digital , Work & Society is a new organisational unit within the “ Digitalisation and the Labour Market Department ” at the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs . It is a new , interdisciplinary organisational unit that observes technological , economic and social trends and helps to shape change together with academia , business and social partners.Research papers and project reports published in English : Becker , N. , Waltl , B . ( 2022 ) . Auditing and Testing AI – A Holistic Framework . In : Duffy , V.G . ( eds ) Digital Human Modeling and Applications in Health , Safety , Ergonomics and Risk Management . Health , Operations Management , and Design . HCII 2022 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol 13320 . Springer , Cham . doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-06018-2_20Jöckel , L. , Bauer , T. , Kläs , M. , Hauer , M. P. , Groß , J . ( 2021 ) . Towards a Common Testing Terminology for Software Engineering and Data Science Experts , 22nd International Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement ( Profes 2021 ) , Turin , Italy , 2021.Kläs , M. , Adler , R. , Jöckel , L. , Gross , J. , Reich , J. , ( 2021 ) . Using Complementary Risk Acceptance Criteria to Structure Assurance Cases for Safety-Critical AI Components , AISaftey 2021 at International Joint Conference on Artifical Intelligence ( IJCAI ) , Montreal , Canada , 2021.Kläs , M. , Adler , R. , Sorokos , I. , Jöckel , L. , Reich , J. , ( 2021 ) . Handling Uncertainties of Data-Driven Models in Compliance with Safety Constraints for Autonomous Behaviour , Proceedings of European Dependable Computing Conference ( EDCC 2021 ) , Munich , Germany , IEEE , 2021.Hauer , M. P. , Adler , R. , & Zweig , K. ( 2021 ) . Assuring Fairness of Algorithmic Decision Making . 2021 IEEE International Conference on Software Testing , Verification and Validation Workshops ( ICSTW ) , 2021. doi.org/10.1109/icstw52544.2021.00029Krafft , T. D. , Zweig , K. A. , König , P. D. ( 2020 ) . How to regulate algorithmic decision‐making : A framework of regulatory requirements for different applications . Regulation & Governance , 2020.Becker , N. , Junginger , P. , Martinez , L. , Krupka , D. , Beining , L. ( 2021 ) . Mitigating safety and discriminatory risk with technical standards , ExamAI – KI Testing & Auditing . Berlin : Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V.Krafft , T. D. , Hauer , M. P. , Zweig , K. A . ( 2020 ) . Why Do We Need to Be Bots ? What Prevents Society from Detecting Biases in Recommendation Systems In : Boratto L. , Faralli S. , Marras M. , Stilo G. ( eds ) Bias and Social Aspects in Search and Recommendation . BIAS 2020 . Communications in Computer and Information Science , vol 1245 . Springer , Cham.Teilen© 2024 Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V.ImpressumDatenschutzProblem melden Cookie Einstellungen Auf unserer Webseite werden Cookies verwendet . Einige davon werden zwingend benötigt , während es uns andere ermöglichen , Ihre Nutzererfahrung auf unserer Webseite zu verbessern . Wir bitten hiermit um Erlaubnis , die folgenden Cookies verwenden zu dürfen . Diese Einwilligung ist freiwillig , nicht für die Nutzung der Website erforderlich und kann jederzeit widerrufen werden . Essenziell Essentielle Cookies werden für grundlegende Funktionen der Webseite wie z.B . für die Anmeldung im Mitgliederbereich benötigt . Dadurch ist gewährleistet , dass die Webseite einwandfrei funktioniert . Cookie Informationen anzeigen Name omCookieConsent Anbieter gi.de Laufzeit 1 Jahr Zweck Enthält die gewählten Tracking-Optin-Einstellungen . Name fe_typo_user / PHPSESSID Anbieter gi.de Laufzeit aktuelle Session Zweck Dieses Cookie ist ein Standard-Session-Cookie von TYPO3 . Es speichert im Falle eines Benutzer-Logins die Session-ID . So kann der eingeloggte Benutzer wiedererkannt werden und es wird ihm Zugang zu geschützten Bereichen gewährt . Statistik Diese Gruppe beinhaltet alle Skripte für analytisches Tracking und zugehörige Cookies . Es hilft uns die Nutzererfahrung der Website zu verbessern . Cookie Informationen anzeigen Name _pk_id.1.9dca Anbieter Matomo Laufzeit 13 Monate Zweck Dieses Cookie wird von der Open-Source-Software Matomo für die statistische Auswertung der Besucherzugriffe verwendet . Name _pk_ses.1.9dca Anbieter Matomo Laufzeit 30 Minuten Zweck Dieses Cookie wird von der Open-Source-Software Matomo für die statistische Auswertung der Besucherzugriffe verwendet . Nur essenzielle Alle akzeptieren
