Ethics Policy | Icelandic Institute for Intelligent Machines Icelandic Institute for Intelligent Machines Search Primary Menu Skip to content About IIIM People Select Past & Present Collabs. , Projs . IIIM ’ s Civilian A.I . Policy Gender Equality Policy Contact Contact IIIM Hátæknihraðbraut fyrir sprota For Media Jobs Selected Publications Scientific & Technical Papers Videos Newsletter ( 2012 – 2017 ) Search for : Ethics Policy We are proud to announce our brand new Ethics Policy for Peaceful R & D . The policy takes aim at two major threats to societal prosperity and peace . On the one hand , increases in military spending continue throughout the world , including automated weapons development . Justified by “ growing terrorist threats ” , these actions are themselves resulting in increased use of undue and unjustified force , military and otherwise — the very thing they are aiming to suppress . On the other , the increased possibility — and in many cases clearly documented efforts — of governments wielding advanced technologies to spy on their law-abiding citizens , in numerous ways , and sidestep long-accepted public policy intended to protect private lives from public exposure has gradually become too acceptable . In the coming years and decades artificial intelligence ( AI ) technologies — and powerful automation in general — has the potential to make these matters significantly worse . In the US a large part of research funding for AI has come from the military . Since WWII , Japan took a clear-cut stance against military-oriented research in its universities , standing for over half a century as a shining example of how a whole nation could take the pacifist high road . Instead of more countries following its lead , the exact reverse is now happening : Japan is relaxing these constraints ( 1 ) , as funding for military activities continues to grow in the U.S. , China , and elsewhere . And were it not for the extremely brave actions of a single individual , Edward Snowden , we might still be in the dark about the NSA ’ s pervasive breach of the U.S. constitution , trampling on civil rights that took centuries to establish . Pages : 1 2 3 Catalyzing innovation and high-technology research in Iceland WHERE TOMORROW IS MADE.™ Iceland ’ s first Think- & -Do Tank in AI & related technologies . Industry ’ s first stop for the Fourth Industrial Revolution . Iceland ’ s only non-profit focusing on industrial automation . Contact IIIM Icelandic Institute for Intelligent Machines Menntavegur 1 , Venus , 2nd fl . IS-101 Reykjavík ICELAND info @ iiim.is Proudly powered by WordPress
