Startups - Digital Catapult | Digital Catapult Skip to content Explore all Catapults Catapult Network Cell and Gene Therapy Compound Semiconductor Applications Connected Places Energy Systems High Value Manufacturing Medicines Discovery Offshore Renewable Energy Satellite Applications About Back Equality , diversity and inclusion Press releases Regions Sustainability Team Contact Insights Back Blogs Publications Clients Back Aerospace , Defence and Security Creative industries Energy and Utilities Government and Public sector Investors Large businesses Research and Academia Startups Telecoms Transport and Infrastructure Services Back Consultancy and strategy Innovation and acceleration Research and development Testbed facilities Technologies Back 5G Artificial intelligence Distributed systems Future networks Immersive Internet of things Quantum Programmes Back Programmes Case studies Get involved Back Careers Events Labs Newsletter Opportunities Contact Search our site ... Contact Search our site ... Client Startups Supporting innovative high growth technology startups with the resources needed for success . Startups Clients Overview Through market-leading expertise , we provide you with the technical and commercial skills you need to develop and scale , while connecting you with relevant industry partners , investors and potential customers . Our programmes apply our proven methodologies to accelerate development and de-risk the adoption of successful solutions that use technology in innovative ways . Our support covers a range of relevant technical and commercial specialisms , including investment , marketing , finance , ethics , and advanced digital technologies . Advanced technologies . Deep tech by nature , cross-tech in practice , driving innovation to solve real-world industry challenges . Targeted support . Meeting participants ’ specific needs at the right level within each programme . Access to experts . Full access to deep and wide expertise and experience : cross-sector , cross-technology and cross-discipline . Application to industry . Bridging the gaps between research , innovation and adoption . Ultra-networked . Connection to the UK ’ s most diverse community of research , innovation and investment talent . 500 Startups across our acceleration programmes £400m We helped raise over £400 million of early-stage funding £52m Machine Intelligence Garage raised £52m investment £3.2m Raised through our Augmentor programme £2m Exceeded in funding through CreativeXR Programmes This is what you can expect when you join one of our startup programmes : Diagnostic sessions . 1-2-1 sessions with experts and mentors to determine your current technological , commercial and strategic needs . Investment guidance . Business and investment support , based on the findings of your diagnostic sessions , including sessions with experienced investors . Access to deep tech expertise . Draw on our specialist knowledge and experience in applying and combining advanced digital technologies to deliver transformational solutions for UK industry . Access to state-of-the-art facilities . Quantum computing , 5G testbeds , immersive labs , future networks labs , virtual production test stages , 3D capture , an open radio network testing environment and more . Potential for follow-on funding opportunities . Successful completion of a programme can open the door to more funding opportunities as you continue to scale . Events Meet us at Bristol Technology Festival Meet us at Bristol Technology Festival from 7 to 11 October , the UK ’ s largest regional Tech Festival . Innovate UK BridgeAI – MLOps Clinic This full-day event aims at introducing the meticulously designed Digital Catapult ’ s Applied AI Suite designed to assist organisations of all… Connected Ecosystems : Quantum Sensing Digital Catapult , in partnership with the Institute of Physics quantum Business Innovation and Growth ( qBIG ) group , will be hosting a… The High Growth AI Accelerator Showcase for Innovate UK BridgeAI Join Digital Catapult for the High Growth AI Accelerator Showcase for Innovate UK BridgeAI to celebrate eight cutting-edge companies from the UK ’ s… Black Founders Programme Showcase Join Digital Catapult and Sony Music UK on 14 November 2024 for the Black Founders Programme Showcase . This event will… Case studies See all Cooking Up Innovation : Clever Foodie ’ s Recipe for Smart Manufacturing Success Part of the Smart Nano NI Programne , Aeroblue Software joined the Manufacturing Innovation Challenge led by Digital Catapult . With indusrty… Loud Parade : case study Part of the FutureScope ’ s Black Founders Programme , Digital Catapult supported Loud Parade to get investment ready and receive business expertise . Nyangibo Gallery : case study Part of the FutureScope ’ s Black Founders Programme , Digital Catapult supported Nyangibo Gallery to get investment ready and receive business expertise Addressing the skills gap with virtual production bootcamps in the North East INFINITY27 collaborated with Advanced Media Production at Gateshead to address the skills gap in virtual production in the North East . Megaverse – Game Changers Discover how Digital Catapult introduced Megaverse to the new immersive initiative—the Advanced Media Production Network . Explore the Broadcast Tech finalist-nominated… De-risking AI adoption and forging a vital support network for early-stage founders Six years after the conception of our award-winning AI accelerator Machine Intelligence Garage the programme has come to a close.… AudioStack : case study Using Aflorithmic ’ s fully-automated production process , anybody can create beautiful sounding audio in seconds . Leveraging DigiFed ’ s cross-border innovation model to solve a pressing industry challenge Learn how the DigiFed programme gave Acciona access to the EU technology innovation community . TOffeeAM : case study Find out how Digital Catapult supported Imperial College spin-out TOffeAM , a cloud platform for engineers . Climate X : case study Part of Machine Intelligence Garage , Digital Catapult supported Climate X to develop their climate tech proof of concept . Publications See all Innovate UK BridgeAI : A year in review A report produced by Digital Catapult for Innovate UK . Innovate UK BridgeAI drives the adoption of responsible AI in the… Advanced Media Production : Foresighting skills for the future report The Advanced Media Production : foresighting skills for the future report has been developed by Digital Catapult and Innovate UK ’ s Workforce… Digital Catapult Annual Engagement and Impact Report 2022-2023 This year we celebrate a decade of driving digital adoption . In the latest Annual Report discover the highlights and impact… Digital Catapult ’ s European Investor Attitude Tracker 2023 New , pan-European research on the views and attitudes of 1,250 early-stage investors – coming soon . Diverse Founders in Advanced Digital Technology Report – 2023 The Diverse Founders in Advanced Digital Technology Report offers a deep dive into investment trends and the background of founders… Digital Catapult Annual Engagement and Impact Report 2022 Discover the highlights and impact from Digital Catapult from the past year . Servitisation – an overview and how-to guide for industry ESG : startup and investor collaboration is critical Sophie Lonergan looks at how investors and startups can work together to create value for people , the planet and profit . KnowRisk report : using digitalisation to transform the supply chain Driving the adoption of AI in the UK Machine Intelligence Garage Impact Report 2021 Contact First Name Last Name Email Company Organisation Type –Please Select– Startups and scaleups Industry/corporate Investors Public sector and tech innovation hubs Research and academia Other Your message I agree to Digital Catapult collecting and processing my personal data in accordance with Digital Catapult ’ s privacy policy . Related news Digital Catapult ’ s 5G Immersive Lab opened by UK Tech Minister Press Release Sir Chris Bryant MP , Minister of State at the Department for Science , Innovation and Technology and the Department for Culture , … Learn more Leveraging data to connect us to nature Blog Read about the programme unlocking the potential of the UK ’ s design industry to benefit small businesses tackling some of the… Learn more Black founders to benefit from creative-technology startup support Press Release Black founders to benefit from creative-technology startup support with the Black Founders Programme Learn more Creative industries to be catalysed by advanced AI solutions Press Release Creative industries to be catalysed by advanced AI solutions through the Innovate UK BridgeAI programme Learn more Inaugural international accelerator takes on cross-border trade and climate challenges Press Release Join the platform and start connecting with supply chain leaders Learn more All related press releases All related blogs Subscribe to our newsletter About Careers Contact © 2024 Digital Catapult Legal Policies Follow us on Twitter LinkedIn Facebook YouTube Medium
