Artificial Intelligence and National Security | Thales Group Skip to main content Global Markets Career Investor Journalist Customer Online Supplier Countries en English Accessibility Default High Contrast Search Close Search form You are here : Home Artificial Intelligence and National Security More In today ’ s rapidly changing world , artificial intelligence ( AI ) is a commonly used terminology that is not always clearly understood . As AI applications are being rapidly adopted it is important to understand what that means , who is using it and to what end . These are especially important questions for national security . To identify national strategies and implications of AI for governments and industry , Thales engaged with the Center for Strategic and International Studies ( CSIS ) who developed an independent report on AI and its potential implications on national security and national security policy . The report , authored and recently published by CSIS , Artificial Intelligence and National Security : The Importance of the AI Ecosystem , analyses the policy frameworks such as ethical AI usage , investment strategy , adoption challenges , operationalization of AI , and international approaches to AI in the national security domain . View and download the full report . SUMMARY OF Report KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Trust The importance and necessity of AI transparency is application-specific . Trust must be met across algorithms , data , and outcomes . Users must understand the mechanisms by which systems can be spoofed . Security Robust and resilient digital capability requires balancing development , operations , and security . A culture of network risk management and cybersecurity ownership throughout and across organizations is critical . People Applying AI requires a skilled and educated workforce with domain expertise , technical training , and the appropriate tools . Organizations must cultivate a culture of data excellence . Success for users in machine learning requires iteration , experimentation , and learning through early sub-optimal performance . Digital Capability An organization must build the foundational digital capability to successfully apply AI technologies ( e.g. , database management , information integration ) . This is necessary to pay down the tech debt . Gaining competitive advantage through information and analytics is an enterprise-wide endeavor from headquarters to the deployed warfighter . Policy Ethical policies and standards must guide the application and implementation of AI technologies . The U.S. government must strengthen its own AI ecosystem through the following steps : Reform hiring authorities and security clearance processing to support bringing in key government and access for contractor personnel . Improve the government ’ s ability to acquire and iterate developmental software by changing budgeting practices for software development . Engage industry broadly and spread bets , utilizing small- to medium-sized data science firms in addition to the tech and defense industry giants , because the problem-specific nature of AI and the early stage of the field mean it is impossible to know where the breakthroughs will come from . Invest in early stage research and development , specifically those areas requiring federal support that may be less commercially viable . Develop tools for AI trust , security , explainability , validation , and verification that can address the high threshold for AI reliability that many government applications will require . Leveraging AI capability means structuring organizations to support the right mix of technical knowledge and domain expertise . The U.S. government must recognize the implications of international activity in AI and move to : Protect the robust private sector AI ecosystem in the United States and partner nations from attacks and detrimental investment ; and Leverage partner nation resources by working first with those partners with common objectives , equipment , and data-sharing agreements while building that commonality with additional partners . RELATED RESOURCES Video : Report launch event Video : Defining the AI Ecosystem Video : Building the AI Ecosystem for National Security Press release : Thales USA report launch announcement . Defence and Security Digital Identity and Security Aerospace Space Transverse markets Specific solutions Social networks Linkedin Twitter Facebook Youtube Instagram Contact us Thales Headquarters +33 ( 0 ) 1 57 77 80 00 Send a message Global Markets Career Investor Journalist Customer Online Supplier © 2024 Thales Credits Terms of Use Personal Data Sitemap Accessibility : partially accessible
