The Thales TrUE AI approach to Artificial Intelligence to be unveiled at the Paris Air Show 2019 | Thales Group Skip to main content Global Markets Career Investor Journalist Customer Online Supplier Countries en English Accessibility Default High Contrast Search Close Search form You are here : Home The Thales TrUE AI approach to Artificial Intelligence to be unveiled at the Paris Air Show 2019 07 Jun 2019 Artificial intelligence Civil Aerospace Defence aerospace Digital Security SIAE2019 Share this article Facebook Twitter LinkedIn FlytX , the new generation connected cockpit for civil and military aircraft and helicopters will be unveiled . A series of conferences , to raise the crucial issues shaping the aerospace and defence world will be open to the public at the Thales pavilion . Thales will take visitors through a journey to discover how digital technologies are reshaping the world for fighter pilots , astronauts , air force generals , airspace managers , globe trotters and Airline Captains The digital revolution affords us a glimpse of the true potential of IoT , Cybersecurity , Big Data and Artificial Intelligence , and the threats they could pose . Of these four digital technology pillars , none are more evocative as Artificial Intelligence . Humans tend to antropomorphise abstract concepts , to give them a voice and a face , and few have been more popularised in fiction as an existential threat , than the notion of machines rising against humans . This year , at the Paris Air Show , Thales pulls back the curtain to try and provide a glimpse of how AI should actually be viewed , not with distrust but with an understanding of how it should be , transparent , understandable and ethical . This year we unveil the Thales TrUE AI approach . The Thales TrUE AI approach stands for Transparent AI , where users can see the data used to arrive at a conclusion . Understandable AI , that can explain and justify the results and finally an Ethical AI , that follows objective standards protocols , laws , and human rights . This approach permeates the Group ’ s offering at the Paris Air Show 2019 , by seeking to glean an AI that puts the human back in control . To demonstrate this , visitors will be taken through a journey to discover how AI will make our world more secure , more efficient and most importantly , put the human at the centre . The journey will begin by asking you a simple question : “ As a child what did you dream of becoming when you grew up ? ” To answer it we will show you the world through the eyes of a Fighter Pilot , an Air Force General , a Globetrotting Traveler , an Airline Captain , an Astronaut and an Airspace Manager . How their world is transformed through the Thales TrUE AI approach , and how our customers , the people who make the world go around , are helped to think smarter , act faster and make critical decisions in an environment where there exists no margin of error because lives are often at stake . This year the Group will be hosting a series of conferences delving into a variety of critical subjects , from the concept of TrUE AI by Thales Director of AI research David Sadek , the management of the drone ecosystem , to the future of Human Factors in cockpits by Dr. Sylvain Hourlier one of the world ’ s foremost experts in Human Machine Interfaces . The conferences will be held at the Thales pavilion and are open to the public . Thales ’ s policy of partnering with Startups and innovative SMEs is renowned throughout the industry and at this year ’ s edition of the Paris Air Show the Group will showcase this with interventions and conferences by not less than five startups like eOdyn , a startup that disrupts our understanding of ocean dynamics through the use of Big Data , Delfox , a specialist in AI for Aerospace and Defence . In its efforts to strengthen its AI offering , Thales also announces it has acquired AI startup Psibernetix to help create Certifiable AI . Originally made famous by its aerial combat application called ALPHA , which consistently defeated the world ’ s top pilots in simulated air combat , Psibernetix is a pioneer in computationally efficient AI technologies . The acquisition will establish explainable AI processes for applications in safety-critical environments . The seminal new technologies unveiled this year include : FlytX the new generation connected cockpit for civil and military aircraft and helicopters more information How the digital revolution makes collaborative combat possible through sharing and applying vast amounts of information . more information How AI will help us safely integrate commercial drones in the aerospace ecosystem , more information Documents PR_190617_The Thales TrUE AI approach to Artificial Intelligence to be unveiled at the Paris Air Show 2019 Contact Civil Aerospace - Giaime Porcu +33 ( 0 ) 1 57 77 92 18 giaime.porcu @ thalesgroup.com 09 Oct 2024 Thales to supply handheld thermal imagers to the Canadian Army Read more 09 Oct 2024 Adani Airport Holdings Limited and Thales Forge Strategic Partnership to Improve Airport Operations and Passenger Experience in India Read more 08 Oct 2024 Thales announces the distribution of an interim dividend and the reduction of its share capital by cancellation of treasury shares Read more Share this article Facebook Twitter LinkedIn All articles . Defence and Security Digital Identity and Security Aerospace Space Transverse markets Specific solutions Social networks Linkedin Twitter Facebook Youtube Instagram Contact us Thales Headquarters +33 ( 0 ) 1 57 77 80 00 Send a message Global Markets Career Investor Journalist Customer Online Supplier © 2024 Thales Credits Terms of Use Personal Data Sitemap Accessibility : partially accessible
