The Institute for Ethical AI & Machine Learning The Institute for Ethical AI & Machine Learning Home Principles ▾ Principles Overview # 1 Human Augmentation # 2 Bias Evaluation # 3 Explainability # 4 Reproducible Operations # 5 Displacement Strategy # 6 Practical Accuracy # 7 Trust by Privacy # 8 Security Risks Institute Initiatives ▾ Responsible ML Principles MLSecOps Top 10 AI Procurement Framework AI Explainability Framework Newsletter Volunteers Network Machine Learning OSS Ecosystem Cross-vendor GPU Computing Linux Foundation Contributions NumFocus Collaboration NeurIPS Workshop 2022 Keynote NeurIPS Workshop 2023 Keynote Newsletter Contact us or Join The AI-RFX Procurement Framework Practical templates to support AI procurement The AI-RFX Procurement Framework is a set of templates that were put together by domain experts to support industry practitioners looking to procure AI systems . The framework is fully open source and was built using our Machine Learning Maturity Model which evaluates the process and infrastructure , going beyond the AI algorithms . Next The AI-RFX Procurement Framework The AI-RFX is a procurement framework is a set of templates to empower industry practitioners to raise the bar for AI safety , quality and performance . The framework is open source , and converts the the Principles for Responsible Machine Learning into a checklist . Download a copy You can request a free copy of the AI-RFX Procurement Framework through the contact form below , which will include the AI Request for Proposal template , and the AI Machine Learning Maturity Model . You can also apply to become a member of our Ethical AI Network ( BETA ) and get access to more resources , including reports , case studies , as well as invitations to exclusive events and round tables . Free as in freedom The tempalte has been released on under an MIT open source license to enable suppliers and industry practitioners to submit changes , case studies or examples . The AI-RFX framework is maintained by a global community of technologists and domain experts . If you are interested to contribute in this or similar projects apply to join the Ethical AI Network , or get in touch through the contact form below Raising the bar for AI safety , quality and performance in industry The AI-RFX procurement framework has been put together by a group of domain experts . Its purpose is to ensure best practices in industry during the procurement , design , devleopment and deployment of machine learning systems in industry . This procurement framework goes beyond the machine learning algorithms . It provides a method to assess the maturity level of the technical infrastructure and processes around the algorithms themselves , by using our Machine Learning Maturity Model . The Machine Learning Maturity Model The Machine Learning Maturity Model is a set of criteria which ensures that the core technical infrastructure and the right processes are in place . It provides the ability for key industry practitioners to set a bar for quality , safety and performance when procuring machine learning solutions . You can request to download a copy of the AI-RFX Framework through the contact form below , which contains this document as well . The model was designed using the Responsible Machine Learning Principles , and consists of the following 8 assessment criteria : Number Assessment Criteria Responsible ML Principle # 1 Practical benchmarks Principle # 6 : Practical accuracy # 2 Explainability by justification Principle # 3 : Explainability by justification # 3 Infrastructure for reproducible operations Principle # 4 : Reproducible operations # 4 Data and model assessment proceses Principle # 2 : Bias Evaluation # 5 Privacy enforcing capabilities Principle # 7 : Trust by privacy # 6 Operational process design Principle # 1 : Human Augmentation # 7 Change management capabilities Principle # 5 : Displacement strategy # 8 Security risk mitigations Principle # 8 : Security risks Get in touch , apply to join , or get access to the AI-RFX Loading… Twitter Facebook LinkedIn GitHub Email © The Institute for Ethical AI & ML . All rights reserved .
