The Digital Humanism Initiative — DIGHUM Skip Skip to main content Skip to navigation menu Skip to A-Z navigation Skip to search form Menu A-Z Menu Activities News , Events , and Highlights Program Overview DIGHUM Lectures Workshops UNESCO Chair Summer School 2022 Summer School 2023 Summer School 2024 Guest Professorship Seminar Series Resources Manifesto Public Statement on EU AI Act Statement on ChatGPT Publications on Digital Humanism Roadmap for Digital Humanism Reading List Lectures Archive Workshops Archive Videos People and Community Committee Speakers , Panelists and Moderators Supporters About Home About Digital Humanism Contact Newsletter Imprint & Privacy A-Z Popular Manifesto News , Events and Highlights Program Overview Statement on ChatGPT A About Digital Humanism C Committee Contact G Guest Professorship Seminar Series H Home I Imprint & Privacy L Lecture Series Lectures Archive M Manifesto N News , Events , and Highlights Newsletter P Publications on Digital Humanism Program Overview Public Statement on EU AI Act R Reading List Roadmap for Digital Humanism S Speakers , Panelists and Moderators Statement on ChatGPT Summer School 2022 Summer School 2023 Summer School 2024 Supporters U UNESCO Chair V Videos W Workshops Workshops Archive The Digital Humanism Initiative Technology profoundly shapes the world we live in , and the stakes are high . Digital Humanism deals with digital technology development and policies based on human rights , democracy , inclusion , and diversity . About The Digital Humanism Initiative is an international collaboration seeking to build a community of scholars , policy makers , and industrial players who are focused on ensuring that technology development remains centered on human interests . On This Page Latest News Activities About Digital Humanism Contact Latest News Recent news , events , and highlights from the Digital Humanism Initiative . Workshop A Paradigm Shift in Computer Science ? 2024-11-28 This workshop focuses on the challenges for computer science and the sciences in general , the move from logic and algorithmic certainty to probability and LLMs . Lecture Series Dame Wendy Hall : “ Governing AI for Humanity – UN Report for a Global Framework for AI Oversight ” 2024-10-22 Dame Wendy Hall will present the UN Report on a global framework for AI oversight , discussing its seven recommendations to govern AI and protect human rights . Public Event Vienna Roundtable on Digital Humanism : “ Federal Trojans ” in Context - An Attempt of Clarification 2024-10-14 An event that invites people to reflect on and discuss digitalization and its effects . Summer School Digital Humanism Summer School 2024 2024-09-02 Join leading experts in informatics , social sciences , and humanities to collaborate on pressing issues of digital politics , economy , and technology . Public Event Public Event : “ Vienna Manifesto on Digital Humanism - The first five years ” 2024-09-02 On September 2 , we celebrated 5 years of the Vienna Manifesto on Digital Humanism . Read all about its achievements , alliances , collaborations , and what ’ s next . Book Introduction to Digital Humanism 2023-11-09 Open access book discussing Digital Humanism in contexts such as AI , platform power , surveillance , democracy , and technology ethics . Want more ? Click here to see more news ! Activities We organize a stream of Digital Humanism activities . Learn more about our activities , and find our main players and cooperations here . Vienna Manifesto on Digital Humanism Public Call to Deliberate and Act on Technological Development Roadmap on Digital Humanism The Result of Our 4th Workshop `` Towards a Research and Innovation Roadmap '' in March 2022 Lecture Series Ongoing Series of Lectures , Online Events and Discussions Workshops Interdisciplinary Workshops on Digital Humanism Publications Open Access Books with Essays from Computer Science , Law and Humanities UNESCO Chair UNESCO Chair on Digital Humanism CAIML Center for Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Digital Humanism Fellowship Cooperation with the Institute for Human Sciences ( IWM ) VU Digital Humanism Lecture and Exercise Course in Master Curricula of TU Wien Informatics Committee Steering Committee of the Digital Humanism Initiative Our Supporters . Their commitment and support make our efforts possible . Follow the links to learn more about our additional partners , cooperations , and sponsors . About Digital Humanism The Corona-Crisis shows that IT keeps the system running . But at the same time IT is changing our society . We are in the midst of the digital transformation , with computer science and its artifacts as a major driver . We experienced the metamorphosis from the stand-alone computer to the global operating system of our world , a journey leading to yet another industrial revolution : digitizing everything , and automating work and thinking . This digital and global operating system integrates , links , and permeates everything : work , leisure , politics , the personal , the professional , and the private . It influences or even shapes actions on a technical , economic , military , and political level . Whereas digitalization is opening unprecedented opportunities , it also raising serious concerns : the monopolization of the Web , the rise of extremism orchestrated by social media , the formation of filter bubbles , the loss of privacy , the spread of digital surveillance , automated decision making , and the potential loss of jobs due to automation . This is also expressed by Tim Berners-Lee ( The Guardian , 16 November 2017 ) with his The system is failing . We are at a crossroads for our future , and the issue is which direction to take , or in positive terms , how to put the human at the center and how to combine technological with social innovation in a democratic process . This is the context of our Digital Humanism initiative . We argue for a Digital Humanism that analyzes , and , most importantly , influences the complex interplay of technology and humankind , for a better society and life , fully respecting universal human rights . We must shape technologies in accordance with human values and needs . Our task is not only to rein in the downsides , but also to encourage human-centered innovation . Such an approach starts from several key points : IT forms a critical building block for our society ; it facilitates and drives change , but it also needs rules and guidance . To understand , to reflect , and to influence this development , we need a multi and interdisciplinary approach , looking at the individual and the society . It is a global international issue . The approach needs to be scientific , in the tradition of the enlightenment – and fact based in the best sense . People are the central focus . Technology is for people and not the other way round . We need to put “ humankind ” at the center of our work . The challenge of building a just and democratic society with humans at the center of technological progress needs to be addressed . The Digital Humanism Initiative is supported by a growing group of internationally renowned experts . They are engaged in a series of ( on- and offline ) events , pointing towards a positive future ! Contact Subscribe to our Newsletter and follow us on Twitter to stay up-to-date . Our roughly bi-weekly Lecture Series offers presentations and panels from worldwide thought leaders . It is typically held on Tuesday afternoons at 17:00 CET . Newsletter Newsletter Subscribe to our newsletter to stay updated . Profile Twitter Follow us on Twitter to stay up-to-date . Profile Youtube Our YouTube channel with recordings of talks from our events . Contact Email Address Contact us . dighum @ ec.tuwien.ac.at The Digital Humanism Initiative CAIMLFavoritenstraße 9-111040 Vienna , Austria Home Contact Imprint Privacy
