Growing the artificial intelligence industry in the UK - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work . We ’ d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK , remember your settings and improve government services . We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services . You have accepted additional cookies . You can change your cookie settings at any time . You have rejected additional cookies . You can change your cookie settings at any time . Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide this message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Services and information Benefits Births , death , marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime , justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports , travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working , jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments , agencies and public bodies News News stories , speeches , letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance , regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports , analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data , Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Business and industry Industrial strategy Independent report Growing the artificial intelligence industry in the UK This independent review , carried out by Professor Dame Wendy Hall and Jérôme Pesenti reports on how the Artificial Intelligence industry can be grown in the UK . From : Department for Science , Innovation and Technology , Department for Digital , Culture , Media & Sport and Department for Business , Energy & Industrial Strategy Published 15 October 2017 Get emails about this page Documents Executive summary Ref : ExecutiveSummary HTML Recommendations of the review Ref : recommendations HTML Growing the artificial intelligence industry in the UK : Full report ( PDF ) PDF , 1.65 MB , 78 pages This file may not be suitable for users of assistive technology . Request an accessible format . If you use assistive technology ( such as a screen reader ) and need a version of this document in a more accessible format , please email enquiries @ dcms.gov.uk . Please tell us what format you need . It will help us if you say what assistive technology you use . Details This independent review , carried out by Dame Wendy Hall FRS FREng ( Regius Professor of Computer Science , University of Southampton ) and Jérôme Pesenti ( CEO , BenevelentTech ) , reports on how the Artificial Intelligence industry can be grown in the UK . It makes recommendations around skills , data , research and adoption of AI . Updates to this page Published 15 October 2017 Sign up for emails or print this page Get emails about this page Print this page Related content Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal The Faraday Challenge : advice from Sir Mark Walport Explore the topic Industrial strategy UK economy Trade and investment World locations UK and the Commonwealth Is this page useful ? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Don ’ t include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details . This field is for robots only . Please leave blank What were you doing ? What went wrong ? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK , we ’ d like to know more about your visit today . Please fill in this survey ( opens in a new tab ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births , death , marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime , justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports , travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working , jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright
