Ben Wagner Carolina Ferro Rita Gsenger JANUARY 2022Democracy and  Digitalisation  Handbook Directorate-General  for International  Partnership

Ben Wagner Carolina Ferro Rita GsengerDemocracy and  Digitalisation  Handbook Directorate-General for International Cooperation and Development European Commission Brussels • Luxembourg, January 2022
Manuscript completed in January 2022 This document should not be considered as representative of the European  Commission’s official position Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2022 © European Union, 2022 The reuse policy of European Commission documents is implemented based  on Commission Decision 2011/833/EU of 12 December 2011 on the reuse of  Commission documents (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39). Except otherwise noted, the reuse of this document is authorised under a Creative  Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY 4.0) licence (https://creativecommons. org/licenses/by/4.0/). This means that reuse is allowed provided appropriate credit is  given and any changes are indicated. For any use or reproduction of elements that are not owned by the European Union,  permission may need to be sought directly from the respective rightholders.  PDF ISBN 978-92-76-43334-7 doi:10.2841/356478 MN-01-21-392-EN-N
iiiTable of contents Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi Executive summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1: Democracy and digitalisation for development:   Where does it stand and where is it going?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 2: Key digitalisation and democracy projects:   What can we learn from them?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2.1. Digital participation and elections ................................ 7 2.2. Civil registration ............................................... 15 2.3. E-governance ................................................. 19 2.4. Judicial system ............................................... 22 2.5. Internet access ................................................ 24 2.6. Data governance .............................................. 27 2.7. Social media .................................................. 30 2.8. Digital and media literacy ...................................... 36
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbookiv 3: Good international practices: Can digitalisation create  meaningful change?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 3.1. Understanding the local context and capacity building ............. 42 3.2. Citizen participation and engagement ............................ 43 3.3. Public sector buy-in ............................................ 44 3.4. User-centric design ............................................ 45 3.5. Cybersecurity and data protection  .............................. 47 3.6. Diverse team and partners ..................................... 48 3.7. International legal standards and rights-based frameworks  ........ 49 3.8. Sustainability ................................................. 50 3.9. Understanding technology geopolitics ............................ 51 4: Typical pitfalls and how to avoid them  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 4.1. Focusing too much on technology ............................... 53 4.2. Following technology trends not suitable to the local context ....... 54 4.3. Lack of usable technology and maintenance ...................... 55 4.4. Underestimating risks to human rights ........................... 56 4.5. Lack of neutral institutional ownership ........................... 57 4.6. Lack of flexibility .............................................. 58 5: Final thoughts: Why digitalisation is not about technology  . . .59 Key partners and resources: Who can help?   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61 References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 EU project list  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
vAcknowledgements This handbook was commissioned by the European Commission  Directorate-General for International Partnerships (DG INTPA). The authors  wish to thank the DG INTPA team, especially Laura Bretea and Nela Cernota,  for their great support, comments and suggestions in previous versions of  this handbook, which helped us improve it considerably. Furthermore, we  are very grateful for the meaningful feedback we received from different  members of European Union Delegations around the world. Special thanks  to Cédric Pierard, Sebastien Babaud, Holly Ruthrauff, Antonio Capone, Katlin  Kattai, Jean Miossec and Christine-Astrig Mardirossian. Finally, we also would  like to acknowledge the valuable contribution of the participants – people  we interviewed during the elaboration of this handbook – without whom this  study would not have been possible. Thank you for taking the time to reply  to our questions and to share your experiences with us.
viAbbreviations CSO Civil Society Organisation Data-Cipation Citizen Engagement and Innovation Data Use for Africa’s  Development DG INTPA Directorate-General for International Partnerships (formerly  DG DEVCO, Directorate-General for Cooperation and Development) EU European Union  GDPR General Data Protection Regulation GIS Geographic Information Systems GIZ German Corporation for International Cooperation GmbH ICT Information and Communications Technology ID Identification IT Information Technology ITS Rio Institute for Technology and Society of Rio de Janeiro MoLG Ministry of Local Government NCHR National Council for Human Rights NGO Non-Governmental Organisation SMS Short Message Service SRP Strengthening Reconciliation Processes in Sri Lanka
viiExecutive summary The Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook provides an overview of  opportunities, challenges and threats related to digital technologies. This  handbook looks at the impact of digital technology on democratic institutions  while implementing international cooperation and development projects. It  seeks to inform European Union (EU) staff, in particular staff based in EU  Delegations, by providing them with:   ●a short review of existing EU policies and an international framework of  digitalisation for development;   ●a presentation of key digitalisation and democracy projects;  ●an analysis that will inform future EU projects supporting democratic  governance with digital technology components;   ●examples of good practices;   ●a discussion of practices to avoid;   ●a list of relevant implementation partners. How to do digitalisation in development projects right This handbook presents a set of key digitalisation and democratic governance projects around the world, developed by the European Commission  Directorate-General for International Partnerships (DG INTPA) and other  international donors and implementing partners. While a variety of important lessons can be learned from this handbook, the most important is that  digitalisation is not about technology or following the latest trends. 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbookviii There is hype that digital technologies can solve almost anything, and  there is pressure to implement them in development projects. This is a  misunderstanding that leads to frequent project failure. Understanding  that digitalisation is an opportunity to improve governance, build  stronger institutions and promote human rights is an important  lesson . However, it will not solve any existing societal problems or organisational failures. Digitalisation is a tool that, if used correctly, can promote  democratic governance. The analysis of several key digital development projects aims to offer concrete examples of good international practices of using digitalisation to  promote democracy and good governance, as well as practices to avoid and  the common pitfalls related to these projects. Recommendations discussed in this handbook While many digital development projects have been successful  around the world, many others have failed . These projects often fail  for predictable and preventable reasons. One way to address these issues is  by looking at some good international practices and analysing how projects  in different parts of the world have sought to recognise and overcome problematic issues. Here, the main recommendations are as follows:   ●Understand and respect the local context and adapt the project to it.   ●Use digital technologies to increase citizen participation and get citizens  engaged at an early stage in the technology design process.   ●Obtain the support of state actors to promote good governance and  democratic changes from inside democratic institutions.  ●Have a user-centric approach to technology, conducting deep user  research and user testing, working with prototypes, and performing a  front-end needs assessment.
 Executive summaryix  ●Consider, from the project’s design, ‘privacy by design’ and maintenance  of database security, prioritising systems and technologies that can be  used independently afterwards.  ●Have a diverse design and implementation team and set of key partners.  ●Have a legal understanding of key aspects (privacy and data protec tion, digital rights, human rights, elections, freedom of expression,  cybersecurity) to ensure a rights-based approach and comply with  national laws and regulations.  ●Create a culture of innovation. The idea behind the technology is what  should be sustainable, not the technology itself.   ●Understand technology geopolitics. The politics of the technological ecosystem should be aligned with the politics of the project to increase the  chances of success and sustainability. The most common pitfalls encountered in digital development  projects present us with an opportunity to learn and avoid these  practices in future projects . Here, the main recommendations are as  follows:   ●Do not focus too much on technology.  ●Avoid following technology trends that are not suitable to the local  context.  ●Technology’s usability and maintenance should not be forgotten.  ●Do not underestimate risks to human rights.  ●Projects should have institutional ownership.  ●Be flexible. Effective development projects on digitalisation and democracy require  an understanding of the power and dangers of digital technologies. These  technologies have an important role in demonstrating what is possible and  leading the way in developing projects that can make a difference. If used  correctly, technology can provide the infrastructure that enables  democracy without becoming the tool that undermines it .

1Introduction The process of digitalisation and the use of digital technologies are simultaneously an opportunity for democratic governance and a potential threat to  democracy. Digitalisation can bring institutions closer to citizens and allow  services to reach underserved populations. Furthermore, it can enable citizen  empowerment and organisations to advocate for positive change. However,  if it is not well-structured, digitalisation bears the risks of deepening existing inequalities and of being misused to undermine democracies and social  cohesion and infringe on human rights. Therefore, it is vital to ensure that  everyone benefits from digital technologies in equal measure. A key element of the European Union’s (EU’s) approach is to ensure that  human rights and democratic values are guaranteed online to the same  extent that they are offline (Council of the European Union, 2014c). Moreover,  digitalisation is one of the European Commission’s objectives and has been  selected as a priority for the Neighbourhood, Development and International  Cooperation Instrument (European Commission, 2018). Additionally, the EU  has committed to the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy   2020–2024 to ‘reinforce exchanges and develop training for EU staff on  the use of digital technologies and AI [artificial intelligence] and their impact  on human rights and democratic processes’ (European Commission, 2020a,  p. 13). However, digitalisation can have a steep learning curve. Without the correct  basic information at hand before a project starts, implementers of digitalisation projects risk reinventing the proverbial wheel or making the same 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook2 mistakes again and again. The opportunities that digitalisation provides can  only be realised if projects systematically build on lessons from the past.  Specifically, when attempting to integrate a rights-based approach  into existing initiatives, developing effective digitalisation projects  can be a challenging task .   The Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook attempts to bring together key  aspects of EU policy and provides EU staff – specifically those based at EU  Delegations  – with concrete examples of how to avoid making common  mistakes in digitalisation projects and how to do digitalisation ‘right’. It does  so by presenting a set of key digitalisation and democratic governance projects around the world that were developed by the EU Directorate-General  for International Partnerships (DG INTPA), implementing partners and other  international donors. A storytelling approach, based on some of the most  relevant success stories, was adopted. This handbook also provides a set of good international practices, common  pitfalls and a list of relevant implementation partners; as well as a frank  account of what implementers can do to avoid common problems and make  their lives easier. The methodology used to develop this handbook consisted of an analysis of  policy documents and several qualitative interviews with key practitioners  in the field and programme coordinators (from DG INTPA, implementation  partners and other funders of development projects).  Finally, this handbook aims to simplify the process of getting up to speed and  ensure realistic expectations in digitalisation projects. In doing so, it seeks  to encourage new and innovative projects that go beyond those that  are already available, while enabling a rights-based approach to  digitalisation for projects and citizens to benefit from the possibilities and changes digitalisation can foster.
3Democracy and digitalisation  for development: Where does  it stand and where is it going? 1. chapter number EU development policy in the field of democracy and digitalisation is driven  by three key concepts derived from recent EU policy documents:  ●Rights-based approach to development cooperation, encompassing all human rights (Council of the European Union, 2014a; European  Commission, 2021);  ●Mainstreaming digital solutions and technologies in EU development policy (Council of the European Union, 2016);  ●Empowering citizens and building more resilient democracies (European Commission, 2020b).  Notably, all four of these policy documents apply to a much broader domain  than EU development policy in the field of democracy and digitalisation.  This means that the rights-based approach and mainstreaming of digital  technologies and services should be standard practice for all EU development projects.  At the same time, while the European Democracy Action Plan (European  Commission, 2020b) is primarily focused on EU Member States themselves,  its broad scope obviously also influences the external relations of the EU.  The three main focuses of the European Democracy Action Plan are:1
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook4  ●election integrity: political advertising, micro-targeting, parity of treatment and media coverage during elections;   ●media freedom and pluralism: safety of journalists, media freedom,  transparency of media ownership and prioritisation of content;   ●disinformation: intensify efforts to combat disinformation in line with  the upcoming EU Digital Services Act.  The potential relevance of these three digital policy issues and areas should  be carefully considered in any digital development project.  The EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy 2020–2024 is the  document of reference for the EU’s external actions. This action plan is very  innovative concerning digital challenges and opportunities regarding democratic governance. It provides guidance on those actions that should be  prioritised in this regard, including the following: i. Provide capacity building for civil society to strengthen their ability to  detect and act on disinformation and interference, and also to assess and  monitor the action of institutions and regulatory bodies in addressing  these challenges while safeguarding the full exercise of fundamental  freedoms. ii. Support civil society actions that foster online media literacy and digital  skills; promote an open, safe and equally accessible internet; and monitor and advocate against internet shutdowns, especially in the context  of elections. iii. In general, assist civil society in advocating for legislation and policy  reforms that apply offline rules to elections and democratic processes  in the online context. The complementarity between the European Democracy Action Plan and  the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy 2020–2024 should be  carefully analysed by EU Delegations to enhance the internal and external  coherence of the EU’s actions.
1. Democracy and digitalisation for development: Where does it stand and where is it going?5 Furthermore, it is key to take a rights-based approach to a digital development project. As different human rights are often used against each other,  it is critical to ensure that a rights-based approach considers all rights, not  just one (e.g. security, free expression) in place of all other rights (e.g. privacy,  human dignity), which seldom leads to a positive outcome or good project.  Additionally, the Digital4Development staff working document from 2017  (European Commission, 2017) defined four major policy areas that are the  focus of overall digital development policy:   ●access  ●digital literacy  ●digital growth  ●enabling technologies. These areas should not be viewed as restricting or limiting policies but rather  as organising or structuring them.  Other relevant EU documents regarding digitalisation and democracy that  are important to consider while designing and implementing development  projects are:  ●‘EU Human Rights Guidelines on Freedom of Expression Online and  Offline’ (Council of the European Union, 2014b);  ●‘Guide to Human Rights for Internet Users’ (Council of the European  Union, 2014c);  ●‘Council Conclusions on Cyber Diplomacy’ (Council of the European Union,  2015);  ●‘Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure  Cyberspace’ (European Commission, 2013).  ●‘Operational Human Rights Guidance for EU External Cooperation Actions  Addressing Terrorism, Organised Crime and Cybersecurity: Integrating  the Rights-Based Approach’ (European Commission, 2015).
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook6 Additionally, the EU Learn and EU International Partnerships Academy offer  information and training on digitalisation, democracy and human rights.
7Key digitalisation and  democracy projects:   What can we learn from them? 2. chapter number From interviewing EU Delegations, implementing partners’ staff and other  key experts, it was possible to map a rich account of interesting and inspiring projects. They provide examples of good international practices, as well  as practices that should be avoided in relation to democratic governance  projects with digital technology components. These projects provide a vibrant overview of the possibilities and threats  of using digitalisation to promote democracy and good governance. A storytelling approach was used to give readers more vivid details of those  experiences1. 2 .1 . Digital participation and elections Digital participation can provide an important step in simplifying democratic  participation, making it accessible to more people. Increasing citizen involvement is crucial in every democracy, as fostering dialogue and communication  can enable unity and reconciliation in often polarised societies. The examples  1 The stories are based on facts that participants narrated during the interviews. However, some  details were added or changed to adapt it to the storytelling approach. During storytelling,  names were changed or omitted to protect the identity of the individuals who were willing to  share their stories. In some cases, places and projects were generalised for the same reason,  especially when sensitive information was shared.2
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook8 below from Brazil have clearly shown what successful digital participation  could look like. Elections are an important cornerstone of any democracy, and some interesting  projects presented below showcase alternatives on how to use technology to  flag violations and the challenges to establishing an effective e-voting system. 2 .1 .1 . Brazil: A case of democratic participation experimentation  Brazil has strong participatory democratic institutions and has become  known worldwide for pioneering participatory budgeting in the city of Porto  Alegre since 1986. One important constitutional democratic participative  mechanism is ‘citizen initiatives’, where citizens can propose a draft bill to  the lower house of municipal, state or federal legislatures. However, they  need the signatures of at least 1 per cent of the electorate at the national  and state levels and usually 5 per cent at the municipal level. This is a high  threshold for people to be able to submit a draft bill. For instance, submitting  a national bill would require a minimum of 1.5 million verified signatures  on paper, which is literally 2 tons of paper to carry to Congress. The major  obstacles in this process are the logistical barriers to collecting and validating these signatures, as well as their identification and address.  Since the Federal Constitution was approved in 1988, no citizen-drafted bill  has ever been processed as such by the National Congress due to the lack  of signature verification, even though five bills that achieved the threshold  were presented. Therefore, Brazilians were not able to claim their constitutional direct participatory rights. Mudamos, meaning ‘we change’, is a Brazilian project created by the  Institute for Technology and Society of Rio de Janeiro (ITS Rio), an independent non-profit research institute2. The project, initiated in 2014, focuses on  2 For more information about the project, see https://www.mudamos.org/ and https://itsrio.org/ en/projetos/mudamos-electronic-signatures/.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 9 increasing citizen participation and democratic engagement and changed the  course of the Brazilian citizen initiative story. It won a Social Impact Award in  2016 by creating a mobile application (app) that enables a new, secure and  verifiable way for citizens to write draft bills and sign to support citizen proposals that should be considered by the legislature. The app was launched  in 2017. ‘Mudamos is a mobile application that enables Brazil’s citizens to  participate in law-making by proposing their own bills and signing onto one  another’s proposals using verified electronic signatures’ (GovLab, n.d.). The solution found by Mudamos was to use blockchain to bring transparency  to the signature and other processes since this technology is secure and  authenticated, and enables privacy by design. Moreover, Mudamos allows  Brazilian citizens to easily access the proposed legislation and sign it. Since its launch, the platform has received more than 8 000 draft bill proposals,  which are analysed by Mudamos’s legal team and volunteers. Furthermore, collaborative law-making is encouraged in Brazil. The states of Rio de Janeiro and  Santa Catarina and the city of Porto Alegre have institutionalised the initiative,  and many others are planning to do so (Konopacki et al., 2019). The app was  downloaded by more than 700 000 people in 2018 (GovLab, n.d.).  The expansion of the initiative that allowed Mudamos users to become engaged  not only in draft bill signatures but also in suggesting new draft bills for signature collection was enabled by a partnership with Abraji (the Brazilian executive  association of journalists). This partnership made it possible for Brazilians to  draft a bill of law in only a few steps. They launched the ‘copy&paste law’  (lawyator project), which is a chatbot where people can easily create a bill of  law. There is a draft bill model to which people add information regarding the  specific topic, and the chatbot creates a PDF and collects signatures (through  the Mudamos app) to be sent to the lower house legislatures.  Currently, there are 25 bill initiatives collecting signatures at the national  level. Starting in 2019, ‘legislative hackathon’ or ‘draft-a-thon’ events were 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook10 held in Rio de Janeiro and João Pessoa where citizens and lawmakers participated to support citizens using the correct form and wording for bills. During  these events, people could create a bill of law in only two hours. To make  this possible, existing laws were used and adjusted to fit a new purpose as  chosen by the citizens. Parliamentarians also participated in these meetings  to help improve the proposed bills. Mudamos: The citizen initiative app Patricia studied at the Federal University of Paraíba in the Brazilian city of  João Pessoa. Like so many of its citizens, she lived in one of the satellite  towns close to the city. Taking two hours to get to the university every day  was exhausting and expensive, but living in João Pessoa was not within  her means. Having no other option, she took the bus every day to get to  class. Patricia always had to buy two bus tickets for a one-way trip, as one  ticket was only valid for one and a half hours, which was shorter than her  travel time to the university. One day at the university, she heard about an interesting project called  Mudamos that, via an app, made it possible for citizens to easily draft  and propose new legislation bills concerning different topics related to  the city’s day-to-day problems. As many people need to commute every  day to get to work or to study, Patricia knew that she could not be the  only person with that problem and was convinced she would get enough  signatures to support her proposal.  She went to a scheduled ‘draft-a-thon’, which took place in an arena.  It felt like being in ancient Greece. Everybody was debating and talking  about political issues concerning the city, including legislators, who were  there to help. Patricia was excited to contribute and solve her own and  many others’ problems. That day, she drafted a bill proposing to extend  the valid time of one bus ticket to two hours, and put it onto the app.  Although her draft bill ultimately did not get enough signatures, thanks to  Patricia’s initiative, local legislators are still discussing the idea and the  possibility of collecting signatures digitally, which would not have been  possible otherwise.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 11 In Brazil, polarisation in society is a severe problem, and consensus is very  difficult. Therefore, ITS Rio and RadicalxChange launched another project to  bring, as one participant called it, the ‘future of democracy or the democracy  of the future’3. To increase participation and foster dialogue and communication, ITS Rio proposed quadratic e-voting, which is a redesigned voting  method reflecting the intensity of people’s preferences in collective decisions. A small experiment proposed by ITS Rio for 2021 was to use this  model to decide the voting order of legislative houses in Brazil. One limitation of regular voting is that it allows people to give only one  solution (one vote), and the majority wins. This methodology might be suitable for elections, but it is not appropriate for every decision that needs  deliberation in daily life or to represent every citizen adequately. In quadratic  voting, votes are distributed equally amongst everyone; this allows citizens  to vote multiple times for the same option, expressing how strongly they  feel about certain issues. Citizens can thus prioritise their votes. For instance,  people can vote twice on issues that are very important to them. Quadratic  voting can be implemented, for example, regarding participatory budgeting  decisions where people can select where funds should be allocated. This  is a good example of technology that can be used to improve democratic  representation. 2 .1 .2 . Russia: Mapping possible election violations The following project also uses information and communications technology (ICT) in relation to elections, but in this case to protect the integrity of  elections. The Map of Violations is a crowdsourcing project started during  the 2011 Russian parliamentary elections. It is administered by the Golos  Movement, the All-Russian Public Movement in Defence of Voter Rights. Golos  is the leading association of Russian citizens for independent observation of  3 For more information about the project, see https://itsrio.org/pt/artigos/tendencias-d e-tecnologia-para-2021/.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook12 elections4. The project aims to collect and map information about possible  violations during electoral campaigns and elections both through observers  and voters5. The project has covered more than 200 electoral campaigns and received  over 40 000 messages. Citizens can use the map of violations available on  the website, an app and a hotline to report election violations. Currently, a  Telegram bot is being developed to assist with information collection about  electoral violations. The information received is moderated, and messages that do not concern  electoral violations or that contain any provocative content are removed.  Moreover, the complaints are evaluated from a legal perspective, providing  correct terminology and explanations of the current laws. An interactive map visualises all violations. Although the data recorded on  the map are not representative, depending on the scope of observation in a  specific region and the motivation of voters and observers to report violations, it shows violation tendencies in particular regions. Crucially, the Golos  Movement owns the data, which is stored on its servers. The map provides  an overview of the types of violations observed in various regions in Russia  (Bader, 2013). On the Map of Violations, three types of violations are distinguished: violations concerning an electoral campaign, for instance, misuse of governmental  resources for creating more favourable conditions for specific candidates;  violations during the voting process, which include violations of the rights  of observers and journalists or a breach in vote secrecy; and violations during the voting count, including breaching vote-counting procedures and the  analysis of results. These categories are subject to change to respond to new  4 See https://www.golosinfo.org/. 5 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.kartanarusheniy.org/page/about.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 13 situations. For instance, a breach in personal security was added recently as  a classification; this can occur in all violation categories, including violence  against individuals, threats and confiscations. During elections, Golos regularly publishes summaries of the most prevalent  messages and illustrates the specific threats identified during a particular  campaign. Additionally, the website offers templates for citizens to register  official complaints, which provide the correct legal wording and the possibility for officials to respond to violations. Despite the project’s successes, discreditation campaigns remain a challenge. These are often conducted by sending false messages, or even using  deep fake video clips depicting electoral violations. The Map of Violations project uses an automated system to detect and filter  out disinformation – for example, duplicate messages from previous elections or the presence of a sender on the internal blocking list. Sometimes,  erroneous information can easily be detected, for example, if the names  of cities or people are incorrect. In that regard, regional coordinators are  involved to verify the messages’ content. This project provides a valuable example of the opportunities and challenges  of implementing digital technologies to promote greater transparency and  accountability around elections. Notably, the project is about much more  than just a technological platform, with the Golos Movement key in working  to maintain the platform and ensure that it does not contain erroneous or  misleading information. Automated systems are insufficient to ensure this  but can contribute to ensuring the integrity of the platform. 2 .1 .3 . The challenges to e-voting: Data storage and infrastructure The success of e-voting projects relies on the digital literacy of the citizens  and a certain digital mindset, as well as the physical infrastructure to implement and realise an electronic voting system or voting via the internet. For 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook14 example, the successful implementation of an e-voting system in Iceland  was only possible due to broad consent among the public and across the  political spectrum, as well as local technical capacity. In Iceland, the challenge of providing data protection to voters’ personal information, who need  to be identifiable but vote anonymously, was solved both technically and  institutionally (Krimmer, 2017).  Despite these opportunities around digital participation and e-voting, there  are also considerable challenges. Kofi6, who is intimately familiar with digital  elections in many countries, shared some worrisome stories. In one case that  occurred in the distant past, an African country implemented an e-voting  system where the voting data were stored outside the country. After a close  election result, the electoral authorities wanted to conduct a recount and  realised that they did not have access to the voting data and needed to  request it from their vendor. This practice challenges the country’s data  sovereignty, leaving it in a vulnerable situation regarding critical data. One might believe that this type of data storage is uncommon within digital  development projects, but sadly, this is not the case. Only six months ago,  Kofi recounted that a solution of this kind was proposed by a large European  company to combat the COVID-19 pandemic across Africa with European  development money. For the African countries in question that might have  ‘benefited’ from this type of solution (i.e. storing data with a vendor outside  the country), this proposal was not acceptable, as they valued the sovereignty of their data.  Kofi shared other stories that were equally troubling, where e-voting or  other electoral software had been sold to countries where it could not be  effectively used or maintained. While some purchases by governments bear  tell-tale indications of corruption, this is not always the case. Purchases may  6 The names of the interviewee, the place and project were anonymised to protect the identity  of the individual(s) who were willing to share this story, especially because highly sensitive  information was shared. 
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 15 be implemented in a way that cannot be sustained over the medium and long  term, be tech-as-solution approaches or may include blockchain technology;  this last is only recommended for countries with a strong infrastructure and  maintenance capacity. There were also stories about dependencies on external companies. Such companies present themselves as the only ones able  to help countries implement the solutions they have sold them, charging for  each instance of assistance.  E-voting can bring new opportunities and increase the participation of societal groups that might not have been reached otherwise. For this to happen,  digitalisation of election processes needs to adhere to the international  standards that apply to democratic elections, including granting integrity,  secrecy, universality and equality of the vote; transparency; accountability; and public confidence (trust). As mentioned in the ‘Draft Note to EU  Delegations: Risks and Opportunities of Electoral Support’ (DG INTPA, 2020),  fundamental principles for genuine elections should be considered and  applied in the design of an ICT system, making it even more likely that the  principles will be respected when the system is operating. The security of  ICT is also crucial to the integrity of the process. It is only by ensuring that  ICT systems abide by these principles that electoral administrations and  other stakeholders will be able to reap the potential benefits of e-ICT, thus  strengthening public trust. A legal and operational framework should complement e-ICT systems, providing a solid base for the fundamental principles  for democratic elections to be granted, including processes that provide for  the transparency and accountability needed for their adoption and use, as  well as for their security. 2 .2 . Civil registration Civil registration procedures are often suggested as one of the key conditions for an effective digital public sector. Therefore, civil registration  projects are frequently developed as part of wider digitalisation projects  within the public sector. Effective civil registration can make people’s lives 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook16 easier. The following stories provide interesting examples of these cases  and point out the importance of having appropriate safeguards in place to  protect human rights. 2 .2 .1 . Tajikistan: Applying the one-stop-shop principle to make civil  registry systems more accessible and user-friendly An effective digitalised civil registration system involves the improved collection and management of civil information, enabling citizens to have easier  access to government services. In Tajikistan, the Support to Civil Registry System Reform project, which  received financial support from the EU, aims at improving the civil registry  system in cooperation with the government – specifically, the Ministries of  Justice, Health and Education7. On the basis of prior projects in this area,  good cooperation and a relationship with the ministries has been established. The project, which started in 2020, supports the development of a  one-stop shop for citizens and interoperability between various government  systems, improving the government’s ability to provide quality public services and incorporate civil information in public decision-making. Many citizens have been facing difficulties in accessing essential social and  economic services and benefits, such as education and healthcare. Some of  these problems derive from the civil registration data, which is sometimes  incomplete, especially data related to births, marriages and deaths. To overcome some of these challenges, the project includes the digitalisation of  historic civil records. At the same time, there have been numerous concerns about the deteriorating  human rights situation in Tajikistan as, in 2020, ‘Tajik authorities continued  to jail government critics, including opposition activists and journalists, for  7 For more information regarding this project, see https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/ system/files/aap-tajikistan- 2020-5022-annex3_en.pdf .
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 17 lengthy prison terms on politically motivated grounds’ (Human Rights Watch,  2021). Press freedom has been under attack (Sanderson, 2020), and the  work of civil society curtailed (ICNL, 2020). In this context, civil registration  data can easily be misused for authoritarian purposes. Therefore, it is important to ensure that appropriate safeguards are in place  that go beyond data protection laws to avoid the potential misuse of civil  registration systems in authoritarian contexts. Measures that can be taken  to protect infrastructure, systems and data include: having information technology (IT) systems that cannot be changed, creating immutable records and  audit trails; strengthening transparency and user rights to access, control  and correct their data in a systematic and transparent manner; creating  access to control systems that prevent misuse and documenting (mis)usage  of citizen data; providing accountable independent governance mechanisms  for the data; and ensuring local storage of data, not just outside the country  in ‘the cloud’. 2 .2 .2 . An African country: Civil registration enabling voter  registration8 Civil registration is an important precursor for effective voter registration.  One project, which was implemented in an African country, focused on civil  registration to enable voter registration. In 2014, voter registration was still done manually in this country, which  posed many challenges with the voters’ roll. The idea was to have a credible,  national registry that could be used to register voters for the next election  and use biometric identification (ID) cards. In 2017, the first mass registration was carried out. The first phase was completed in a relatively short time  with an initiative that included 9 000 volunteers going door-to-door to talk  to people and explain the purpose of the registration to sensitise them. This  8 The place and project were anonymised to protect the identity of the individual(s) who were  willing to share this story, as sensitive information was shared.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook18 was considered a big step, especially in rural communities, as many people  were not registered. Moreover, the media, including local radio, was used  to reach out to people in remote places. After sensitisation, people were  registered and received biometric smartcards, which intended to guarantee,  among other things, that only one person could cast one vote in an election.  However, at the same time, civil society voices raised concerns about the  degree of biometric data collection during civil registration and the absence  of a national data protection law in the country. The first part of the civil registration process and its use during the first  election was a success. However, considerable challenges emerged in the  following election year. Prior to this election, nearly 3 000 children were  registered as adults with the intention of increasing the voter base in favour  of one party. The local registration authority’s staff informed the project’s  funder team confidentially that they were acting under duress to abide by  the instructions given to them by their superiors to register children as adults.  This posed a challenge to communication and trust, which was regained by  making changes in the local registration authority’s directorship and quarantining suspicious registrations from that period on a separate server and  adjudicating each suspicious case. Those registrations that were proven to  be illegitimate were then removed from the database. The main database  was restored with no suspect entries a couple of months later. The project  funder’s team worked with the people responsible locally to encourage the  return of the biometric ID cards at the end of the recovery exercise.  To regain trust, the local registration authority also met with civil society  organisations (CSOs) and requested that key stakeholders – including political  parties, traditional chiefs and religious leaders – assist in sensitising the public to strict adherence to ID registration requirements. Subsequently, a joint  press conference with the country’s registration authority was held to clarify the incident, and the electoral commission and the public were engaged  through a phone-in programme on national radio addressing the issue.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 19 Despite the challenges, the project was extended to include the registration  of births and deaths until 2022. This case of a civil registration project is a cautionary tale of what is possible  but also what can go wrong in the context of using civil registration data for  voter registration and how to proceed in such situations. Using centralised  civil registration databases linked to biometric data for voting should be  considered particularly challenging. When civil registration databases are  misused, as was true in this case, technology leads to a further loss of trust  in the electoral process rather than support. Such problems for democratic  governance are further exacerbated when technological innovations lack  the necessary institutional arrangements, such as functional data protection  laws.  2 .3 . E-governance Governance projects using digital technologies such as social media can  prove successful in increasing citizen participation in governmental procedures. Moreover, e-governance can be useful to increase citizen access  to public services and government access to people, to modernise governments, and to make them more effective and approachable, as the following  examples show.  2 .3 .1 . Egypt: Increasing public access to the government A good example of increasing people’s access to governmental services  exists in Egypt, where the Improvement of Public Services project, started  in 2015, developed a public service map to provide online access to over  500 public services in cooperation with the Ministry of Local Development  and the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development9. The project aims  to foster decentralisation and improved access to local public services. The  9 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/36607.html.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook20 online platform provides information about the responsibilities of governmental offices, including the fees and documents needed, as well as a  feedback option.  Mobile citizen services were expanded by using municipal buses and  e-kiosks, where government employees visited citizens with the necessary  equipment, such as printers, tablets, credit card readers and scanners, to  provide one-stop contact points. These were especially valuable for people  with disabilities, the elderly and people living in remote areas. In addition,  terminals were established in cities’ central meeting points, where public  administration officers could be easily contacted by phone. The map now  provides better access to 500 governmental services, including 16 citizen  service centres. Additionally, more than 700 public service employees were  included in local capacity-building programmes.  Local citizen service centres were modernised, including an expansion of  services into underserved areas. This included the standardisation and  simplification of processes to increase transparency. Multiple avenues of  communication between citizens and the government were established,  including email and exchange forums. These were accompanied by information campaigns and events to make citizens aware of these new opportunities  (GIZ, n.d.a).  2 .3 .2 . Palestinian territories: Citizen participation and social media Another example comes from the Palestinian territories. Several e-governance  projects were realised as part of the Local Government Reform  Programme, which started in 201510. One project, a joint initiative between  GIZ (German Corporation for International Cooperation GmbH) and the local  volunteer internet and media platform Dooz11, aimed to increase the political  10 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/ giz2018-en-case%20book-Lets%20Talk%20Digital.pdf . 11 See http://www.dooz.ps/.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 21 participation of citizens in the Nablus region (Hauswedell, 2014). The story  below illustrates how this project came about and its development. Enabling citizen participation in governance with social media For a long time, Jalaa had been working for Dooz, a social media platform in  Nablus, a city in the Palestinian territories. She loves her job as a journalist.  Trying to promote democracy and dialogue between citizens and the local  government was challenging and rewarding. Nablus only has about 415 000  inhabitants, but various issues are important for the city, such as traffic  accidents which occur frequently in front of the local university.  Jalaa and the Dooz team came up with the idea of organising public  hearings where municipal officials could talk directly to citizens about  various issues. They planned 10 hearings per year, making videos and  posters to promote them with citizens. Jalaa and her colleagues would  brainstorm and talk about various topics they could tackle during the  hearings, remaining flexible in case anything important came up right  before a meeting.  For the first hearing, about 100 people showed up, and everybody at Dooz  was excited about how well their idea had been received and how people  really wanted to participate. They realised how unique the opportunity  was, to have officials talk about many facets of a topic in an unfiltered  way. For instance, because of the hearings, the municipality finally built  a tunnel for pedestrians to provide safe passage for people exiting the  university building, and accidents were avoided. One evening, after another successful hearing with the mayor, Jalaa was  approached by a group of people. They were devastated to have missed the  mayor, as they had driven in from their village to speak about issues with  their properties in the city. Jalaa told her colleagues the next day about  what had happened, and they thought of a solution. To allow increased  participation, the team decided to stream the public hearings online, live  and unedited, and take questions from people who posted them. It was much more valuable for the region’s democracy for thousands of  people to participate, instead of the hundred who could be present at the 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook22 hearing at a specific place and time. The journalists of Dooz brought the  idea up with the Local Government Reform Programme and got immediate  support. They started preparing the next public hearing in an online format,  assembling speakers and topics, and advertising with trailers and posters  online. The topics had been added based on citizens’ input regarding their  needs and concerns. At first, the internet connection did not work well, so  they quickly obtained a fibre optic connection to be able to stream the  public hearings.  The citizens of Nablus and other towns were very interested in the online  public hearings. The average number of active followers per live session  was 10 000–150 000, depending on the subject and the population size of  the reported area. At this point, they had the engagement of 3–4 million  people on their social media page per month. The number of immediate  actions taken by the Nablus municipality based on discussions during the  public hearing is about 1–5 per session, and the number of follow-up stories produced is approximately 5–15 per topic. 2 .4 . Judicial system Digitalisation in the judicial system can improve the transparency and efficiency of judicial processes, enabling an increase in the protection of human  rights. Digitalisation of legal processes, for instance, can enable significant  facilitation of bureaucratic processes for the staff of public institutions and  citizens, simplifying access to rights. The following projects in Egypt and  Morocco illustrate how digital technologies can improve the judicial system. 2 .4 .1 . Egypt: Complaint system on human rights abuses Egypt’s Strengthening Reform Initiatives in the Public Administration  project, which receives financial support from the EU12, was launched in col12 Contract number ENI/2017/385-537 (EC). 
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 23 laboration with the National Council for Human Rights (NCHR) in 201613. The  project aims to support public institutions to work more effectively based on  the needs of the citizens. To that end, an assessment of the current digital  infrastructure to improve the communication between the headquarters and  local branches of the NCHR was performed. The project also accomplished  digitalisation of the complaints system on human rights violations and  thus enabled citizens to share information about incidents of human rights  abuse. In these ways, NCHR transparency, accessibility and effectiveness  were strengthened. The project also facilitated the training of NCHR staff to support technical  and organisational skills. Overall, more than 100 people working for the  NCHR have been trained in human rights topics; awareness-raising campaigns on human rights have reached over 200 public officials and 650  citizens14. 2 .4 .2 . Morocco: Modernisation of the Court of Cassation The Open Government: Modernisation of the Supreme Court project in  Morocco from 2016–2017 digitised the procedures of the Court of Cassation  to make it more efficient, transparent and accessible to the public15. The  project mainly aimed to increase transparency and bring the administration  and government closer to the citizens. The Court of Cassation is the highest  judicial body in Morocco. In 2011, the country added the promotion of transparency and participation to its Constitution. The Open Government project  aimed to increase the court’s efficiency to benefit disadvantaged groups in  society and citizens involved in litigation.  13 The project collaborates with the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation;  the Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform; and the Central Agency for  Organisation and Administration. For more information regarding the project, see https://www. giz.de/en/worldwide/24247.html. 14 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANKI2osB2MQ. 15 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/42178.html.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook24 At the beginning of the project, the court identified its priorities and  established conceptual and technical requirements for digitalisation of information. For that purpose, staff members visited the Supreme Court of the  Netherlands, the International Criminal Court and other institutions to learn  from these different perspectives and experiences. The staff could thus see  various systems to determine the best technical and institutional solutions  for the Court of Cassation.  A website was designed to enable closer proximity of the court to the citizens of Morocco by making legal information about the court’s procedures  and material about the judicial system accessible. The website allowed  for a secure mode of communication and published the court’s decisions.  Furthermore, the court’s archive containing past procedures was made  accessible to the staff, administration and citizens. The project cooperated  with local IT consultants and the court administration. The local administration and court staff were trained to use digitised tools and the systems  necessary to digitalise information about court procedures. As a result, the court can work more efficiently and more closely with citizens  because of the transparency and accessibility of its procedures, enabling  quicker and simpler access to information. The project increased citizens’  trust in the judicial system and improved the public’s perception of the court  (GIZ, n.d.b).  2 .5 . Internet access Providing internet access and the requisite infrastructure is key to the success of any digitalisation project. The EU’s substantial efforts to help bridge  the global digital divide are intrinsically linked to the promotion of an open,  global, free, safe, secure, resilient and privacy-based internet that is respectful of human rights.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 25 However, that infrastructure might have to be built from the ground up;  it needs to be maintained and often includes capacity building with the  stakeholders involved. Open internet is also an increasing challenge in the  context of growing geopolitical competition around digital technologies and  the emergence of alternative internet models. Therefore, it is no longer a  given that the expansion of connectivity will be linked to the open internet.  Development projects must be aware of these challenges, and develop strat egies to prevent and mitigate these risks, as the following example shows.  2 .5 .1 . An African country: Data protection challenges16  Internet shutdowns are becoming increasingly common across the world,  and the possibility of losing all internet and phone connectivity needs to be  considered in every development project (Access Now, 2021; TRT WorldNow,  2021). A similarly relevant issue is the increased targeting and misuse of  data collected and stored by digital development projects. As digital development projects are frequently data-intensive, they should be particularly  careful how these data are managed, stored and governed.  The following story shows how important digital connectivity is for effective governance in societies across the world. Depending on the situation  and available infrastructure in a partner country, projects might need to lay  significant groundwork prior to realising advanced digitalisation projects.  People might not have internet access and therefore would not be able to  use, for instance, an app developed during a project. This groundwork might  include setting up online infrastructure, such as an email and communication system; adhering to data protection standards; and guaranteeing the  safety of users. 16 The name of the interviewee, the place, and project were anonymised to protect the identity  of the individual(s) who were willing to share this story, especially because sensitive information  was shared. 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook26 Data protection: A cautionary tale Work at the agency where Max was employed was going quite well, and he  had been involved in civil registration projects in Africa for several years.  One day, violent conflicts broke out, and the government was involved  in military confrontations. As a result, they shut off the internet for the  region in which Max and his team were working.  A terrorist group planning an insurrection obtained sensitive data containing the names, addresses and personal information of government  officials. Max and his team had been collecting, digitising and saving  that data in their servers, including data for country citizens in their civil  registration project. Due to budget cuts, data protection was only an afterthought. The data had not been saved and protected properly. Now, the  terrorist group could use the data against them.  Max and his team were taking shelter without any possibility of informing  headquarters about their well-being. The organisation was not prepared  for such a situation, even though the regions where they worked were  repeatedly plagued by conflict. This was the most difficult situation thus  far, and not having access to the internet made it even more dangerous.  The organisation decided to give every team member a satellite phone,  so they would not have to rely on the internet infrastructure. Max was  shocked, as satellite phones make it much easier to track precise locations  compared to other communication devices, putting the team at risk during  this violent conflict. He discussed this concern with his supervisor, and  the organisation decided against the satellite phones. Max and his team  ultimately were removed from the dangerous region, but the data they  lost could not be recovered. Nonetheless, the organisation learned important lessons, such as the need  for data security precautions, especially when there is a risk of data leak;  the need for alternative means of communication in case of an internet  shutdown; and the potential dangers of using satellite communication. The  experience enabled the organisation to adapt and improve its approach.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 27 2 .5 .2 . Sierra Leone: Building infrastructure and capacity locally The Meeting Critical Infrastructure and Technology Needs in the  Parliament of Sierra Leone project17, which received financial support  from the EU18, developed a platform for the parliament that provided an  email system and a website in 2017.  The project aimed to increase the infrastructure of the parliament of Sierra  Leone. It included email access for parliament members to enable secure  communication. The private exchange of documents was also possible on  the platform – for example, to elaborate a bill of law. A website was developed as part of the platform, which was mostly for communication purposes,  and infrastructure was improved to provide internet access. Open events  were organised to integrate more people by enabling citizens to comment  on the legislative process using a website developed for that purpose.  This project is an example of a needs-based approach, providing a high  level of transparency, in which infrastructure and capacity were built locally.  However, it also showcases how, as soon as the internet infrastructure is  established, organisations need to be prepared and have a contingency plan  in case there is a blackout and the internet does not work. Data protection  needs to be guaranteed, especially for sensitive data that could be misused. 2 .6 . Data governance Data governance includes the handling of different types of data, especially  in international and governmental contexts. Data protection is an important  part of this, as it is crucial to protect sensitive data, citizens, human rights  defenders and other concerned parties. The following projects are excellent  examples of data governance and of making use of data in a beneficial way. 17 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.ungm.org/UNUser/Documents/ DownloadPublicDocument?docId=1016425. 18 Contract number FED/2019/410-585 (EC). 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook28 2 .6 .1 . Palestinian territories: Using GIS data to increase transparency Palestine’s19 Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) developed a platform called Geomolg20 in cooperation with the Local Governance Reform  Programme, which started in 201521. On the platform, spatial data about  urban planning, land usage, road network characteristics such as placement  and width, cadastral data and relevant data from other institutional and  ministry networks are stored, managed and made available. This includes  the urban master plans of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, making a wide  variety of data accessible on Geomolg. The platform is accessible to members of the public, non-governmental  organisations (NGOs), researchers and government officials, providing a  user-friendly approach to access spatial data. The platform is supported by  consultants and engineers focused on geographic information systems (GIS).  The master plans are centrally stored on one server that is continuously  updated as data are collected and adapted.  The MoLG initiative to digitise spatial data sets and make them available  through a web map application was found to be beneficial by practitioners  in many institutions, who were instantly able to find and access spatial  data not only from MoLG but also from other governmental institutions.  This encouraged additional institutions to share their data and utilise the  platform in their regular work. The practice of data sharing has led to a discussion of formalising procedures and standards of data exchange among  governmental organisations through the establishment of a national spatial  data infrastructure.  19 The designation of Palestine shall not be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and  is without prejudice to the individual positions of the Member States on this issue. 20 See https://geomolg.ps/L5/index.html?viewer=A3.V1. 21 For more information regarding this project, see http://www.baladiyat.ps/CMS/Upload/Admin/ Documents/GeoMOLG_Leaflet_English.pdf .
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 29 Initially, the application focused on disseminating urban master plans on  background aerial photographs. As that was successful, more data were  included, such as parcel specifications, boundaries, electoral districts and  aerial photographs.  In addition to facilitating access to information, the Geomolg information  system enables the computerisation of governmental procedures and the  development of e-services. An example of such an e-service is citizens’ ability  to use the Geomolg platform to register objections to proposed urban master  plans; and to enable the management of decisions on urban master plans  between the local, regional and national levels. The platform significantly  enhances access to information and is vital in planning future developments  in the Palestinian territories (Numan and Helwa, 2015).  2 .6 .2 . African Union: Increasing citizen participation by using data The Citizen Engagement and Innovation Data Use for Africa’s  Development (Data-Cipation)  project22, based in Ethiopia, includes all  member states of the African Union and aims to increase citizen participation in governance, promote digital transformation by responsible data  use and support emerging technologies. The project collaborates with the  African Union Development Agency and the African Union Commission.  Data-Cipation, which started in 2018, is a data and analysis platform to  generate the innovative use of data in the African Union by adhering to data  protection standards (Toolkit Digitalisierung, 2021).  The project has multiple goals, such as providing feedback regarding countries’ data sovereignty and the promotion of data protection principles in  initiatives. For that purpose, a digitalisation portfolio overview of Africa was  created. The project also supports African Union organisations in strengthening citizen engagement and initiatives to focus on data’s role in programmes.  22 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/90729.html.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook30 In that regard, the project (i) enables cooperation between African policymakers and digital innovators, (ii) enhances citizen engagement in good  governance by using digital and non-digital approaches and (iii) encourages  digital transformation for good governance by using data responsibly and  including emerging technologies. Overall, the project focuses on encouraging African citizens to better communicate their needs and issues to the government. It makes the involvement of  citizens in development decisions by policymakers easier. Products and services using data are promoted by enabling networking to strengthen African  data markets, including the collection, aggregation and analysis of data. The  project results show enhanced collaboration between African Union organisations, enhanced innovation and improved citizen engagement. 2 .7 . Social media Many digitalisation projects revolve around the use of social media, which is  crucial for outreach and visibility, and for fostering engagement. Social media  can be a valuable tool in strengthening a project, but must be implemented  carefully. Social networks may create negative effects for a project, including  the dangers of disinformation and hate speech – which might cause disruptions in society, and even violence. Furthermore, the digital literacy of the  local population and sustainability of projects might be a challenge.  2 .7 .1 . Sri Lanka: Facilitating reconciliation on social media An excellent example of using social media successfully and overcoming  obstacles connected to it is the Strengthening Reconciliation Processes  in Sri Lanka (SRP) project23, which received financial support from the  EU24. The project, which began in 2018, collaborates with government,  23 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/18405.html. 24 Contract number ACA/2017/385-379 (EC). 
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 31 non-government and grassroots entities in different fields25 to strengthen  national reconciliation processes.  SRP developed a communications strategy that included a social media  strategy for Facebook and Instagram accounts with the central approach of  unpacking reconciliation through multimedia content and initiatives on different themes26. The multimedia content prioritised a storytelling approach,  which proved to be particularly successful. It took the form of videos and  photo stories in which interviewees shared personal experiences and opinions on how they had been affected or their actions transformed because  of SRP project support.  Initiatives in partnership with non-government and grassroots entities  created independent Facebook campaign pages with user-generated content, thus building dialogue and community among youth online and offline  who were engaged to promote social cohesion and peace. Building on user  experience, the project’s social media pages were given differing identities  according to their target audience. The COVID-19 pandemic pushed SRP  and its partners to explore new means of communicating and engaging target groups through social media. They organised Facebook and Instagram  live events featuring influencers, artists, activists, journalists and experts  on reconciliation-related thematic issues. Facebook watch parties replaced  in-person film screenings and dialogue events27. A watch party series was  organised as a campaign for the 16 Days of Activism against Gender-Based  Violence in November 2020, screening local short films by women filmmakers, followed by Facebook live conversations with the directors and women’s  25 For instance, Search for Common ground (see https://www.sfcg.org/) or the National Fisheries  Solidarity Movement (see https://www.nafso-online.org/). 26 See https://www.facebook.com/SRPsrilanka/?ref=page_internal and https://www.instagram. com/srpsrilanka/. 27 See https://www.instagram.com/tv/CE6UW2cBUhj/.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook32 rights activists28. There was a lot of engagement, and many comments were  recorded during and after the live watch party.  The content created and promoted by the project adapts flexibly to specific  issues and sets a focus on diversity. As a result of lessons learned and context analysis, training to increase social media literacy has been incorporated  in partner initiatives as a further strategy to combat online hate speech  through awareness and capacity building.  Developing social media strategies and content to combat  hate speech targeting ethnic and religious minorities Joanna and her team were in the process of developing a new communications strategy for SRP when, in April 2018, anti-Muslim violence spread  across Sri Lanka’s South and Central Provinces.  In Digana and Ampara, local skirmishes, fuelled by hate speech and disinformation on social media, led to the spread of anti-Muslim violence. This  took a particularly dark turn on platforms like Facebook, with the largest  number of users in Sri Lanka. Hate speech, disinformation and fake news on social media led the  Government of Sri Lanka to temporarily shut down all social media  platforms. While this enabled the government to control the crisis, the  shutdown also hindered voices of peace calling for a meaningful resolution  and understanding among communities. In 2020, Facebook commissioned  an independent inquiry, which confirmed that the abuse of their platforms  contributed to the level of violence experienced. However, in 2018, Joanna and her team also saw the potential of these  online platforms to build peace and bring about dialogue and positive  communication. They developed a communications strategy that involved  a project page on Facebook and Instagram, partnerships with NGOs and  grassroots entities, and online campaigns for greater engagement on  28 See https://www.facebook.com/399616567246704/videos/414923949865871.
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 33 social media to promote reconciliation. SRP commissioners saw the value  of attempting to engage communities online. As the strategy underscored  the risks and mitigation steps and highlighted the benefits of supporting  voices for peace in this contested landscape, commissioners gave the team  the green light to proceed. They developed a communications strategy to not only use the platforms  for outreach but also to work with it to promote the project’s objectives.  The platforms focused on reconciliation, using the space to articulate  multiple ideas of what this concept meant to people in Sri Lanka and to  promote understanding and unity around shared principles and emotions. The COVID-19 pandemic created challenges in reaching diverse communities through physical events. It pushed the project to adapt quickly by  using innovative strategies on these platforms (e.g. Instagram live series)  to continue engaging diverse ethno-religious communities – enabling them  to engage in dialogue around the media’s role in the pandemic, mental  health and coping strategies, storytelling as a means of articulating lived  experiences, and impacts of gender-based violence on women and girls,  among other topics. Furthermore, it offered opportunities for other SRP  components to use the platforms to engage audiences. For example, the  project’s arts and culture unit, which could not host any in-person events  during the pandemic, had the opportunity to host arts-based events online  with the support of Joanna’s team.  In almost three years, the project’s Facebook and Instagram pages, as well  as those of partner interventions, have reached over 4 million people, in  addition to 8 million people through traditional media. Research initiatives  with local and international partners tackling social media regulation and  hate speech trends have led to strategic engagement with youth, members  of government and civil society at the policy level in Sri Lanka. 2 .7 .2 . Mauritania: Using social media to improve the protection of  human rights A project in Mauritania used social media in connection with local capacity  building. The Promotion des Droits Humains et Dialogue sur les Droits  Humains project, which started in 2015, aims to improve the protection 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook34 of human rights, supporting the government and civil society actors such  as journalists and human rights defenders29. Cooperating with the Human  Rights Commission and other partner organisations in the country, the project aims to increase human rights awareness in the population, especially  for women and youth. Overall, the project strives to educate and inform  citizens about their rights. Various measures to raise awareness have been  realised in cooperation with public and non-public actors. In that regard, the  National Commission of Human Rights receives technical advice to better  realise its mandate. The role of media and public debate is emphasised. Journalists receive train ing to improve their proficiency, especially concerning human rights (CFI  Media Development, n.d.). The focus is on youth, who can use journalistic  resources and social media to tell their stories, make their voices heard  and inspire other youth. Young people are enabled to become reporters by  using their smartphones to shoot documentaries about issues and stories  of their choice. The films are published on social media and cover various  topics, such as problems with water supply or child marriage. A mobile app  was developed for the participants to give feedback about their experiences. As a result of the project, almost 50 000 people have learned about their  rights, and 41 journalists took part in training courses to publish reports on  human rights issues30. Additionally, more than 140 young people learned to  produce and publish online content about human rights issues.  29 For more information regarding this project, see https://www.giz.de/en/worldwide/35093.html. 30 See https://www.giz.de/en/downloads/giz2017_fr_ar_Regards_de_pres.pdf .
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 35 2 .7 .3 . Online disinformation and hate speech in an Asian country31 As people gained more access to the internet and smartphones in an Asian  country between 2010 and 2012, they started to use social media more  frequently. Facebook became a synonym for the internet, and almost everyone in the country under discussion used Facebook for news consumption,  entertainment and private messaging. This was convenient for surveillance,  as every user registered an account, and the authorities could follow whoever posted content online.  People were inexperienced with the technology, and digital literacy was low.  Increasingly, hate speech and disinformation were distributed through social  media. The military also began to deliberately create and spread fake news  about ethnic and religious minorities, which led to an increase in violence.  A project tried to counter this development in cooperation with local organisations. A network of local CSOs was established, which worked quite well.  Additionally, they cooperated with Facebook to remove harmful content and  fake accounts. In some places, the local organisations’ infrastructure was  not very well developed. For instance, electricity was often only available  by solar panels. This country has many ethnic groups, and all of them speak their own language. Most projects focus on the media written in the main language,  ignoring the hundreds of local languages. This was a problem because it  ignored harmful content produced in other languages. The project in question  included CSOs monitoring hate speech and filtering it out in media written in  other languages spoken in the country. Contact with local people was crucial  when content inciting violence was identified on social media. Therefore, the  CSOs had staff serving on the project who were in contact with local police  31 The name of the interviewee, the place, and project were anonymised to protect the identity  of the individual(s) who were willing to share this story, especially because sensitive information  was shared. 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook36 forces. The CSOs reported very frequently, some even every month, to the  project organisation, thus keeping stakeholders informed about what was  happening locally and with the help of grassroots organisations.  This project intended to reduce the impact and online dissemination of hate  speech, and the organisations identified and corrected fake news online.  Ultimately, about 200 instances of hate speech were documented per  month, an average of 25 fake news stories per month were countered, and  three violent incidents in total were avoided.  The project also trained local organisations in administrative and technical  processes for monitoring and fact checking social media and in responding  to emergencies. Fake news and misinformation peaked before the elections,  and it was feared that the elections would be compromised due to negative  influencers. The project was quite successful in mitigating this risk, but it  ended abruptly because of a political crisis, and could not be completed. 2 .8 . Digital and media literacy While media literacy generally focuses on teaching people the core skill  of critical thinking to be able to critically engage with mass media, digital  literacy is more about enabling people to participate in digital media in a  wise and safe manner. Some development projects include specific training  for local partners to build capacity and literacy. These training sessions can  include social media (as discussed above in Subsection 2.7), internet use,  and the specific skills of partners and citizens. 2 .8 .1 . Sri Lanka: Increasing social media literacy and outreach  The Strengthening Reconciliation Processes in Sri Lanka project (discussed above in Subsection 2.7.1) works with grassroots organisations and  NGOs to strengthen their capacities to create content on social media and  build engagement. This project was designed following SRP’s promotion of 
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 37 youth campaigns online, in which there was a lack of understanding on how  to use these online platforms, even while young people had access to them.  SRP integrates capacity building in social media literacy and content creation  in its initiatives with CSOs to support ongoing community building as part of  its sustainability measures.  Targeting youth as the largest segment of social media users, ‘social media  boot camps’ have been designed and deployed to orient youth to the context  and nuances of hate speech and expose them to tools and opportunities to  create meaningful, pro-peace content online. During the boot camps, youth  learn about various tools, in addition to technical aspects of how to recognise and engage with hate speech. Different partners are included, such as  organisations working on women’s rights or with rural youth. SRP is also  working to organise a social media community of practice to establish a  core working group that will continue to drive peacebuilding on social media  and support efforts through content amplification and share lessons learned  and best practices. 2 .8 .2 . Central Asia: Using games for literacy training A slightly different approach was taken by the Building Resistance in  Youth in Central Asia (BRYCA) project, which received financial support  from the EU32 and included partners in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan  and Uzbekistan, where online games were developed to build resistance  against hate speech online and on social media33.  The project began in 2020, and the games include all local languages and  Russian. They already have more than 9 000 users. One such game is Qlever,  which was developed for marginalised youth to build resistance against fake  32 Contract number EIDHR/2019/410-636 (EC).  33 For more information regarding this project, see https://erim.ngo/bryca-central-asia/.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook38 news and misinformation34. The games are mostly educational and entertainment games developed by local IT companies and other organisations,  such as MediaNet  International Centre for Journalism, the Media Support  Center Foundation, the public organisation Gurdofarid, and the Modern  Journalism Development Centre. The games use real cases of fake news  taken from the four countries.  BRYCA is based on another project providing media literacy training for  schools in Kyrgyzstan. Some challenges were overcome regarding differing  legal frameworks in the involved countries. The digital divide proved to be  challenging, as access to the internet varies in rural and urban communities.  2 .8 .3 . Brazil: How to spot a bot Social media has its dangers, such as the dissemination of disinformation  and the occurrence of fake accounts. In 2018, ITS Rio and the Technology and  Equity Institute launched an EU-financed project35 called Pegabot (Gotcha  Bot). The project created a user-centric platform for users to determine if a  Twitter account is run by a bot or a human36. The higher the score, the more  likely a user account is a bot. The project defined four target audiences:  (i) heavy internet users, (ii) journalists, (iii) NGOs and (iv) politicians and  policymakers. With this project, it was possible for users to uncover if a hashtag was promoted by humans or a bot (ITS, n.d.b). Additionally, a chatbot was introduced  to reply to questions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic using information  provided by renowned fact-checkers on the internet. The aim was to counter the spread of disinformation and fake news regarding the pandemic.  Tutorials, blog posts and workshops have also been published or organised  34 See https://tj.qlever.asia/support. 35 Contract number EIDHR/2019/410-633 (EC).  36 For more information regarding this project, see https://itsrio.org/en/projetos/pega-bot/ .
2. Key digitalisation and democracy projects: What can we learn from them? 39 to support the fight against disinformation in Latin America. Various regional  CSOs have participated in the workshops, and a practical approach to fight  disinformation has been developed, including a set of tutorials to develop  tools for automated analysis of disinformation (ITS, n.d.a).  The project was extended to include Spanish-language accounts with the  platform Atrapabot37. The platform aims to counter disinformation in Latin  America, and it is supported by researchers, journalists and fact-checkers.  Local organisations are supported through workshops, tutorials, and blog  posts to increase media literacy in Latin America. 37 For more information regarding this project, see https://itsrio.org/en/projetos/atrapabot-en/ .

41Good international practices:  Can digitalisation create  meaningful change? 3. chapter number The international development community has been seeking to incorporate  digital technologies into their programmes in the past decade to improve  outcomes. These initiatives have had several positive results and made  advances in areas such as elections, health, civil registries, human rights  and agriculture; and have reached marginalised groups, improving the communication and connection of communities, cities and regions.  Still, many projects have failed, often for predictable and preventable reasons. In this regard, it is useful to look at some good international practices  and analyse how projects in different parts of the world have sought to  recognise and overcome problematic issues1. Before analysing good international practices, it is important to warn readers  of the different levels of political risk inherent in starting digitalisation projects. Clearly, a project on citizen participation has a significantly lower risk  than one setting up e-voting or a biometric voter register. Therefore, evaluating the political risks that both the EU and the host country would take  when implementing a project, and assessing the level of technical difficulty  1 Additionally, see EU Learn and the EU International Partnerships Academy for more information  and training on digitalisation, democracy and human rights.3
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook42 are essential considerations when determining the feasibility of financing  and endorsing digitalisation projects. The following subsections list good international practices that every practitioner should consider when implementing digitalisation and democratic  governance projects around the world. 3 .1 . Understanding the local context and  capacity building The observance and respect of the local context has repeatedly been emphasised as crucial for successful digitalisation projects and for reaching an  audience to create change. While this suggestion may sound obvious, it is  important to acknowledge how frequently it is missed. Contextual project implementation has proved to be a challenge. Although  it was later a success story, the SRP project in Sri Lanka initially made  multilingual posts on social media that were not successful and proved to  be alienating for local people. Moreover, the design of social media posts  and other internet homepages proved to be crucial to contextualising the  aesthetic preferences of different local cultures. After writing different posts  in multiple languages and adapting their aesthetics to the local culture in  question, the social media posts proved to be a great success in generating  responses and interactions and fostering a dialogue between the different  local cultures.  Other contextual elements also need close attention. Digital and media literacy are often challenges that need to be considered when planning a  project with any digital element. The role of CSOs in fighting disinformation  is crucial. They can assume an oversight role on national initiatives of digital innovation. Building the local capacities of CSOs, including their digital  literacy and skills, is therefore crucial. 
3. Good international practices: Can digitalisation create meaningful change?43 Providing a non-digital option to digitalisation projects has proven to be a  good practice as well, particularly in contexts where there is a large digital  gap. Digital-first may make sense in certain contexts, but only if there is a  non-digital option as well, especially if a key service is being provided. 3 .2 . Citizen participation and engagement Citizen participation is a very important element of any digitalisation project  that wants to reinforce democratic values. To start simply, informing and  publicising participation opportunities, even if they are offline, can be a very  powerful tool. People often do not know about participatory experiences and,  therefore, do not become engaged.  Regarding participatory processes, experience has shown that one of the  most important roles technology can play is helping raise awareness about  the opportunity to participate. Most people first decide whether to participate  at all and then by what means (online or offline, in paper or electronically).  The effect of the means selected can be relatively small, signifying that  adding technology to the participatory processes should not be a preliminary  goal. Experience reveals that initiating citizen participation is less difficult than  sustaining engagement. A good international practice has been the use of  chatbots as a follow-up mechanism to foster citizen engagement over time,  for example, during participatory budgeting. Frequently, technology seems mysterious to people. To overcome this obsta cle, projects should provide something simple that citizens can use and  practice, allowing them to step out of the role of passive users. For example, a Brazilian project used this logic and enabled people to develop active  behaviour regarding identifying bots on Twitter, instead of passively telling 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook44 them, ‘Hey, this is a bot, be careful’2. To determine if a Twitter profile is a bot,  users need to copy and paste the link of the Twitter profile for verification by  Pegabot3. The Brazilian case has shown the potential of active behaviour in  bursting institutional and societal bubbles. By enabling people to challenge  the information they receive inside their bubble, Pegabot allows them to  assess credibility from their own perspective – which may increase their  probability of bursting their information bubble and letting in different points  of view. For instance, in the Brazilian case, a Twitter account that continually  spread misinformation was very popular. When people found out it was a  bot posting the misinformation, they looked for different perspectives from  others connected to the fake account. Another good international practice is to not underestimate the value of  the democratic deliberation process, whereby people can exchange their  points of view and publicise their preferences. Through deliberation, citizens  encounter other points of view and may come to understand and integrate  them into their own opinion. For instance, when asked how many times they  want their garbage to be collected, most people will probably reply ‘every  day’. However, if through deliberation they understand that for that to happen, a school would have to be defunded, they would most probably alter  their opinion. In that regard, particular and more extreme opinions should  be heard but should not get too much attention. Otherwise, belief in the  project may be lost. Moderation (online and offline) is critical to decide how  to handle extreme opinions and include them to some extent. 3 .3 . Public sector buy-in State actors, such as legislative houses, judicial bodies, policymakers and  executive agencies (e.g. ministries and secretaries), are considered key  2 It would also be beneficial if Twitter flagged and/or removed those accounts that are bots that  make malicious use of automation.  3 Described in Subsection 2.8.3; also see https://pegabot.com.br/. 
3. Good international practices: Can digitalisation create meaningful change?45 partners for institutional support regarding digitalisation and democratic  projects. In democracy-centred projects, there is typically one actor that  needs to be changed and improved – i.e. the state. To promote changes  through digitalisation projects, it is necessary for state actors to find the  project interesting, open the proverbial institutional doors and support the  project from the inside. If projects come from outside institutions and have  no institutional support, it is hard to ensure their adoption. To enable sustainability, strengthening institutions before the project starts and co-funding  projects are helpful. One key practice that has been mentioned numerous times is obtaining  support for the project from the more bureaucratic levels of state, not just  politicians. On the one hand, these levels can resist the project, even though  politicians give their support. On the other hand, bureaucrats can carry out  a project independently from the government that is in office. This was the  experience of participatory budgeting in Brazil, which continued beyond the  electoral cycle due to bureaucrats embracing the project. Projects with governments can be particularly challenging. Issues such as  corruption, or the fact that governments may be more interested in the  money funding the project or the assets it can buy than in the project itself,  can lead to a low project success rate. What has proven effective in these  cases is having a framework for transparency, keeping the government completely informed at all times and understanding partners’ internal politics.  In that regard, communication and understanding the differing interests of  stakeholders are crucial. 3 .4 . User-centric design User-centric design is critical to ensuring the use and success of a project.  Do not assume that you know who your end users are or what they want  until you have spoken to them extensively. The human aspect must be at the  centre of the design and implementation of digitalisation projects. Therefore, 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook46 a holistic approach to project design that does not exclusively consider only  technical issues was strongly recommended by participants.  End users and key stakeholders, such as CSOs and human rights defenders,  should have a say in the development of a project from its foundation.  This increases the democratic aspects of the project and its final usability. Therefore, a good international practice is to work with prototypes and  perform a front-end needs assessment. This ultimately makes the project  more sustainable. A very important lesson in this regard is to not underestimate users’ experiences. Prior to project design, it is important to conduct deep user research  and testing. For example, in Uganda, user research showed that local people  knew how to reply to short message service (SMS) texts on their mobile  phones, but they did not know how to initiate an SMS message of their  own. However, project designers did not know this relevant information in  advance. Designers were developing the project under the assumption that  people knew how to write their own SMS messages and had to redesign the  project.  Additionally, a user-centric design enables engagement, especially in online  spaces such as social media. Localising a project by conceptualising a  logo, creating a brand story, and customising the aesthetics of the internet  and social media pages to the specific local culture proved to be helpful  with engagement in the SRP project in Sri Lanka (see Subsection 2.7.1).  User-centricity includes sensitivities to differing local languages and possible  animosity between user groups. On social media, gender differences need  to be considered, as women tend to hide on social media due to recurring  harassment. Project designs need to be sensitive to the experiences of different user groups.
3. Good international practices: Can digitalisation create meaningful change?47 3 .5 . Cybersecurity and data protection  Cybersecurity and data protection are very important aspects of a dem ocratic and successful digitalisation project. Cybersecurity refers to the  measures taken to safeguard internet-connected systems, such as hardware  devices, data centres and software, against unauthorised access. Data protection refers to the protection of personal data (name, address, ID number,  and health status, among others) and of the subject associated with that  data – the actual person about whom a data controller holds personal data  and who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference to that personal  data – understanding their rights as to how their personal information is  collected, used, stored and shared. Digitalisation projects worldwide have shown that data protection is a crucial issue, and a good practice is to consider it from the project’s design,  taking a ‘privacy by design’ approach (OECD, 2013). It is important to have  international standards and frameworks as a reference, such as the OECD  Privacy Framework (OECD, 2013), the United Nations ‘Guidelines for the  Regulation of Computerised Personal Data Files’ (UN, 1990) and the EU  General Data Protection Regulation (EU GDPR) (European Parliament and  Council of Europe, 2016). Moreover, taking national and regional data protection laws and frameworks into consideration is fundamental to developing  digitalisation projects with a rights-based approach that is context-localised. Regarding cybersecurity, it is important in some cases where technical  capacity is lacking to rely on external technical support to ensure the security  of the data being stored and processed. Furthermore, ongoing maintenance  of the security of databases needs to be guaranteed. In this regard, it is  crucial to avoid the vendor lock-in problem concerning external technology  providers. This means not becoming dependent on a single provider and not  being able to switch to a different vendor without substantial costs, legal  constraints or technical incompatibilities. 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook48 A good international practice has been to prioritise systems and technologies  that can be used independently afterwards and – above all – to seek agreements where local staff can be trained in the use and, where applicable,  the development of technologies and systems. Having partners or project  members who know the technology well and can tailor it for the purposes of  the project is key to successful project implementation. Developing supportive local ecosystems is crucial to the sustainability of digital development  projects.  Solutions such as cloud storage, especially for civil registration projects, are  not ideal, as they might create problems with data sovereignty. This is the  case when the servers are outside the country where the data were collected. It is also essential to ensure that the use of storage services complies  with national laws, including the data protection and privacy regime, and  considers the security controls offered by using cloud technologies. Before  making decisions to rely on private cloud storage, the data controller or  processor should perform a specific risk assessment and should remain  liable to data subjects for any breaches of data protection that the cloud  provider performs. Project designers need to be aware of what happens with  the personal data they gather. It is their job to ensure respect of human and  digital rights and to ensure the data protection and digital security of all data  managed within the project. Finally, transparency and oversight by civil society actors, such as CSOs and  human rights defenders, or other independent societal actors can be helpful  as a control mechanism to prevent the misuse of data. A lack of security and  data protection can lead to interference by external interests and misuse for  political reasons. 3 .6 . Diverse team and partners Having a broad design and implementation team that includes social scientists and legal and IT experts is crucial for successful projects. Making these 
3. Good international practices: Can digitalisation create meaningful change?49 different silos of knowledge work together is challenging but extremely  important. Team diversity has been emphasised by participants as an important guard against a project’s not becoming one-sided, politically speaking.  Translators are important as well, so administrators and innovators can  understand each other. Asking for technical assistance if needed should be  encouraged. Diversity should be considered not only regarding knowledge areas but also  team members. Building teams that achieve diversity across race, gender,  sexual orientation, age and economic conditions, among others, is a good  international practice. A more diverse team is important to develop more  inclusive digitalisation projects and less biased technologies. For exam ple, digitalisation and social media practices have a gender dimension  (Schoemaker, 2016). Having a diverse set of key partners while developing the project has also  been highlighted as a best practice. Having different stakeholders to support the project is important to incorporate different perspectives; exchange  experiences; and share information, insights and resources. It also increases  adherence to the project and its overall reach and sustainability over time.  Important partners include those at the state level, CSOs and networks of  organisations, the private sector (e.g. companies that already have programmes on democratic norms and become partners) and international  organisations. As a good practice, consult with experts from civil society,  companies that want to work responsibly and human rights experts, as they  can be important project partners.  3 .7 . International legal standards and  rights-based frameworks Having a solid understanding of key legal aspects, such as privacy and data  protection, digital rights, human rights, elections, freedom of expression and  cybersecurity, is essential for successful project design and implementation. 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook50 It can support a rights-based approach, as well as compliance with national  laws and regulations. Having a legal framework around the project is mandatory. Moreover, it is crucial to understand the rules of the online platforms  used; otherwise, they might deny access to their services, and the project  can be suspended abruptly. While respecting local standards and laws is the best practice, a good  international practice is to use international standards and rights-based  frameworks that concern the key aspects mentioned above and additional  ones that the project might be related to as a guide. If national laws do  not cover the topic or cover it loosely (e.g. lack of data protection laws or  human rights standards and regulations), it is important to follow international standards and take a rights-based approach.  For instance, the EU GDPR (European Parliament and Council of Europe,  2016) was mentioned by several project coordinators as a high standard to be used, especially in civil registration projects. The Principles for  Digital Development (Waugaman, 2016) were named as a key resource, as  well as human rights standards framed in international, regional and local  frameworks and laws. The African Union Convention on Cyber Security and  Personal Data Protection (African Union, 2014) was also mentioned as an  example of cybersecurity. 3 .8 . Sustainability According to the Principles for Digital Development (Waugaman, 2016),  building sustainable programmes, platforms and digital tools is essential to  maintain user and stakeholder support, as well as to maximise the long-term  impact. Promoting local capacity building while including CSOs is also crucial  for the sustainability of any digitalisation project. However, practical experience has shown that there is a need to carefully consider the different  meanings of sustainability for digital technologies.
3. Good international practices: Can digitalisation create meaningful change?51 Some argue that digital technologies are not designed to be sustainable but  rather for innovation. The innovation, or the idea behind the technology, is  what should be sustainable. Sustainability is more about the practices that  are created and the culture of innovation that is generated. The best practice in these cases has been to exchange and learn from the failures and  successes of other projects and, based on this knowledge, further develop  the innovation that these projects initiated. The technology might change,  but the project remains sustainable. Multiple experts suggest that resources  about the implementation of digital projects – such as a handbook, guideline  or central database of lessons learned – would be helpful for more successful project design and implementation. Sustainability is also about having sufficient funds to realise a project and  keep it running over time. The use of open-source technology was frequently  mentioned as a best practice in this regard. However, this is not always possible. Institutionalisation of the project by an NGO, private company or local  government was also mentioned as a way to achieve long-term, positive  impact. Therefore, a good international practice is to develop a definition  of sustainability for each initiative. Sustainability must be built in from the  start if it is to be successful. 3 .9 . Understanding technology geopolitics The choice of the technologies used is not neutral, but rather involves  concrete political decisions. It is particularly important in this context to  appreciate the (geo)political context in which technological systems are  developed. There is an ongoing global struggle for dominance in technological infrastructure, which can have a big impact on human rights.  For example, many countries in Europe and North America are currently  refusing to install networking infrastructure equipment by large Chinese  manufacturers, as they are concerned about the national security implications of doing so. China and Russia are also attempting to set new 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook52 international standards for new digital technologies, shaping the way in  which these technologies are developed.  Individuals implementing large-scale technology initiatives – in particular,  infrastructure projects – should be aware of these geopolitical considerations and ensure that they feel comfortable with them before starting the  project. The choice of technologies, vendors and maintenance options – even  if purchased in Europe – always means buying into a specific technological ecosystem, with its strengths and limitations. When the politics of the  technological ecosystem are well aligned with the politics of the planned  project in question, this greatly increases the chances of a successful and  sustainable project. 
53Typical pitfalls and how to  avoid them 4. chapter number Many emerging technologies are surrounded by hype, which leads to ‘solutionism’, or the notion that a specific technology or technology in general  can solve every problem. Digital technologies can solve many problems and  accomplish great things. In this sense, digital by default is great. However,  focusing too much on digital tools neglects the necessity of a needs assessment and might cause harm by increasing digital divides and technology  dependency, and overwhelming public administration and citizens. 4 .1 . Focusing too much on technology A common pitfall identified in several initiatives worldwide was to overemphasise the technology that would be used and not the problem(s) it was  trying to approach or solve. For projects to be successful, the focus needs to  stay on the problem. Technology is just one possible means to achieve more  effective results. Otherwise, the risk of developing elaborate digital solutions  that have little or no applicability in daily lives increases significantly.  Additionally, projects should not be about technology, as technology alone is  never sufficient. It is necessary to engage people through capacity building,  research and user testing, among other things. Therefore, regular strategies for project planning, design and implementation need to be in place.  Knowing how to balance the use of technology while addressing and solving 4
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook54 problems – and as a tool to extend the reach of the project and its positive  impacts – is a challenge. 4 .2 . Following technology trends not  suitable to the local context There is frequent pressure to implement digital technologies in development  projects. This is linked to a belief that digital technologies can solve almost  anything. Usually, policymakers or project coordinators want to shine. The  introduction of digital technologies is something that makes projects shine –  a reason why countries select projects that use technology buzzwords. A lot  of money is spent quickly, especially surrounding hyped topics, leading to a  ‘mania of feasibility’, which cannot contribute to sustainable project implementation. However, aside from the hype, administrations often experience a  certain unwillingness to introduce new technologies and innovative solutions,  which usually depends on the experience the responsible people have. Digital technologies are often sold as miracle cures that will solve all problems in a country. Instead, they often produce poor results and are not  implemented transparently. Various companies try to sell their product to  local governments, which might end up with a million-dollar bill for technology that is not understood by the local people and does not produce  positive impacts. Furthermore, local governments might become dependent  on such companies, having to pay considerable amounts of money for extra  services. That is especially the case with heavily promoted technologies such  as blockchain, which can bring many positive results but should not be used  as a solution for any kind of problem. Extra care is warranted for expensive  solutions that do not respect minimum procurement standards, data protection, local law or international standards. Overall, technologies such as blockchain or artificial intelligence are trends  that should not simply be exported to developing countries without ensuring  that the necessary infrastructure and capacities are in place. Knowledge 
4. Typical pitfalls and how to avoid them55 transfer requires a much broader ecosystem approach, rather than using  technologies to provision solutions. 4 .3 . Lack of usable technology and  maintenance For technology to meet the needs of citizens and therefore be useful, it is  necessary to have a user-centric approach and invest in user research and  testing. Additionally, establishing a digital project – for example, through  developing an app – takes longer than usually estimated; an app, once developed, needs to be maintained and remain usable over time.  Frequently, however, it is difficult to convince public administrators to properly test users and create a design in a user-centric way, as they are strongly  focused on being re-elected. Political interests and agendas are sometimes  more important, and projects may not be developed in the best interest of  citizens. This has led to the creation of ‘technology graveyards’.  Overall, taking the time to develop a project and complete user testing and,  possibly, randomised control trials to determine if a technological tool meets  the needs of users is not as common as it should be. Furthermore, a good  contingency strategy is necessary until a project is sustainable. An example of a lack of maintenance, user testing and usability is a project  from sub-Saharan Africa. Websites for local towns were created to share  information nationally and internationally. However, nobody in the administration felt responsible for these websites. They were neither maintained  nor used. Social media platforms, for instance, are massively used by locals  and could have been a useful tool to reach citizens. Maintaining an entire  website has proven to be more effort that, ultimately, does not pay off and  is not sustainable over time.
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook56 4 .4 . Underestimating risks to human rights The risk of state surveillance is often underestimated, and approaches that  do not take that risk into consideration are sometimes supported by development projects. However, the possibility that certain technologies developed  or implemented for specific purposes in a project will be later misused to  the detriment of the citizens cannot be excluded. For instance, digital civil  registration systems can be used to persecute and/or exclude religious or  ethnic minorities. Technological systems are powerful tools of control because, among other  reasons, they enable the collection and storage of an incredible amount of  data on citizens – most of which is personal and sensitive data, and can  easily be misused if a government becomes more authoritarian. The use  of technological systems in non-democratic and inclusive ways may lead  to gender-based violence, persecution of minorities, undermining freedom  of opinion and expression on online platforms, discrimination through automated systems, increased risks to electoral rights, surveillance of human  rights defenders identified as threats to the regime, as well as other risks to  human rights and democracy. These risks should always be considered, and necessary safeguards must be  implemented to ensure that a rights-based approach remains possible even  in a changing political environment. Here are a few examples of relevant  safeguards:  ●Avoid the centralisation of data.  ●Ensure strong data governance procedures are put in place.  ●Strengthen local civil society ecosystems to respond to challenges and  risks early.  ●Build transparency by design so that any significant changes are automatically evident.
4. Typical pitfalls and how to avoid them57 4 .5 . Lack of neutral institutional ownership Having broad institutional support for digitalisation projects and not relying  on a single person or a particular area of an institution is an important lesson learned from different experiences worldwide. The lack of institutional  ownership is a common pitfall. Broad institutional support allows projects to  continue regardless of who started them, providing sustainability over time.  It is essential to embed the project in existing institutions and processes,  plugging into institutional decision-making.  If governments carry out the projects, it is crucial that this institutional backing is perceived as neutral. In polarised political environments, it is critical  to have support from different sides of the political spectrum. Otherwise,  citizens might attribute the project to one side of the spectrum – which might  become toxic, particularly in online spaces – and they will not be willing to  participate. Another significant risk is promoting the project only to the people who  voted for a certain politician, disregarding all other citizens. Thus, instead  of an exercise of enfranchisement and digital democracy, it becomes disenfranchisement. It is important to work on a level that is perceived as  neutral, to be able to hear voices beyond those that are already heard, and  to understand the expectations and opinions of different groups in society.  This provides the project with more legitimacy, while reaching constituents  who generally do not have a voice. The project needs to be perceived as  an institutional project and not an initiative related to one specific party or  ideological preference. For example, in the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul, the governor’s  cabinet led an initiative called The Governor Asks. It was a crowdsourcing  process that allowed citizens to make proposals to the state through an  online platform. It was developed with great citizen engagement. More than  5 000 proposals were recorded, and millions of people participated. In a 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook58 live session with the governor, around 3 million people participated and  discussed the proposals. The project had all the good practices of digital  democracy. However, it had no institutional anchoring. When the governor’s  term of office ended, the project was also finished. Even though it was  considered a good initiative, the next governor from a different party did  not want to continue it, because it was perceived as an initiative from a  specific party. 4 .6 . Lack of flexibility Designing for sustainability might cause a project to ultimately fail, as the  technology needs to be flexible to adapt to innovation and avoid becoming  irrelevant. Furthermore, a new technological innovation might come along  that could simplify certain processes in the project. Remaining flexible and  open to include such innovations is beneficial.  This approach is sometimes discussed as an ‘agile’ approach to technology  development. However, an agile approach can also struggle to set clear  boundaries and red lines, as it involves constantly adapting during the development process. Although flexibility and an agile approach to technology  are important, ensuring clear boundaries in technological development is  equally important.  Some participants emphasised that digitalisation projects, and especially  project planning, will become outdated at some point. Thus, trial and error  are important, as well as being able to visualise the process as a learning  curve instead of a rigid plan. Failing is an essential step of the process, and  it is necessary to be persistent. Therefore, it is important to think carefully  about sustainability in digital technologies and adapt them to each specific  project. 
59Final thoughts: Why  digitalisation is not about  technology 5. chapter number Digitalisation is frequently misunderstood. It is not about silicon chips, computers or cables. It is about governance, relationships and political power.  This misunderstanding leads to a frequent failure to focus on the critical  aspects of what digitalisation is and could or should be.  Digitalisation is an opportunity to improve governance, build stronger institu tions and promote human rights. Digitalisation should not be seen as a quick  fix for existing societal problems or organisational failures. If corruption is  rife in an institution, a new blockchain is unlikely to fix it. If elections struggle  from a lack of legitimacy, technology is not a silver bullet for creating free  and fair elections. However, this does not mean that technology is useless.  If anything, there are  hardly any development projects in the world that can function effectively  without a technological component. Digital technologies have an important  role in showing what is possible and in leading the way in developing creative projects that can make a difference. It is critical to acknowledge that  all technologies have a political component and ensure that these politics  are consistent with European fundamental rights principles and standards.  This potential is what makes digital development projects so interesting  and, when done right, incredibly powerful. Technology must provide the 5
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook60 infrastructure that enables democracy, not the tools to undermine it. We  hope this handbook has provided some ideas and inspiration on how to use  digital development appropriately. Now it is up to you, dear reader, to put  these ideas into practice.
61Key partners and resources:  Who can help?  There are numerous organisations that work on democracy and digitalisation. This list could not possibly be considered complete. However, it names  a few key actors in the field and lists several principles and documents that  might be worth becoming familiar with. These are presented alphabetically.  ●Access Now is a non-profit organisation defending and extending the  digital rights of users in various global operations. It focuses on privacy,  freedom of expression, digital security, business and human rights, and  net discrimination. https://www.accessnow.org/    ●AfroLeadership is a Cameroon-based organisation that promotes digital  rights, human rights, freedom of expression, democracy, and governance,  including via coalition building. https://afroleadership.org    ●ARTICLE 19 is an organisation based in several major cities and regions  around the world, working with freedom of speech and the right to information on five intersecting areas: civic space, digital, media, protection  and transparency, all of which are underpinned by a focus on equality  and a local-to-global theory of change. https://www.article19.org    ●The Association for Progressive Communication is an organisation and  international network of CSOs promoting peace, human rights, development and environmental protection by means of information and  communication technologies. https://www.apc.org/    ●The Collaboration on International ICT Policy in East and Southern  Africa (CIPESA) is based in Uganda and works to advance rights, 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook62 respecting internet policies in East and Southern Africa through research  and advocacy. https://cipesa.org    ●‘Data Protection for Social Protection: Key Issues for Low- and  Middle-Income Countries’. This issue paper was developed for the  Social Protection Interagency Cooperation Board (SPIAC-B) to discuss  the risks to privacy and personal data, particularly adapted to the context  of social protection systems in low- and middle-income countries. https:// enabling-digital.eu/?p=499    ●Derechos Digitales América Latina is an organisation based in Chile  promoting and defending human rights in the digital context. It focuses  on freedom of expression, privacy, personal data, access to knowledge  and copyright issues. https://www.derechosdigitales.org/    ●The Digital Asia Hub is a non-profit think tank based in Hong Kong. It  focuses on issues surrounding the internet and society with a platform  for researchers, civil society and the private sector for research, knowledge sharing and capacity building focusing on digital technologies in  Asia. https://www.digitalasiahub.org/    ●Digital Defenders Partnership offers support to human rights defenders  under digital threat and works to strengthen local rapid response networks. https://www.digitaldefenders.org/  ●Digital Empowerment Foundation is based in India. It seeks to empower  marginalised communities to access, consume and produce quality infor mation online; it regularly undertakes policy advocacy and research in  support of this aim. https://www.defindia.org    ●Digital Principles are a central resource for all digital development  projects and provide a strong minimum standard on how to develop  projects while integrating human rights and other key practices. https:// digitalprinciples.org/    ●Enabling Digital Rights and Governance is a research and consultancy  initiative of academics (who authored this report) based across Europe,  working on digital technologies, human rights and good governance.  https://enabling-digital.eu/  
Key partners and resources: Who can help? 63  ●The Engine Room is an NGO, globally supporting organisations and individual actors to use data and technology for their cause. It strives to  help others increase the effective use of technology and cut costs for  further social change, equality, justice, human rights, good governance  and accountability. https://www.theengineroom.org/    ●The EU Gender Action Plan (GAP) III provides an agenda for gender  equality and women’s empowerment in EU external action, including a  policy framework for the EU. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020JC0017&qid=1617813800070  ●The European Democracy Action Plan aims to empower citizens  and build more resilient democracies across the EU. https://eur-lex. europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2020%3A790%3AFIN& qid=1607079662423  ●HIVOS is a development aid organisation based in the Netherlands that  provides financial support to organisations in Africa, Latin America and  Asia. It focuses on civil rights, climate justice, gender equality, diversity  and inclusion. https://hivos.org/    ●The Institute for Technology and Society of Rio de Janeiro (ITS  Rio), Brazil, is a non-profit organisation with a team of professors and  researchers from different academic institutions that advocate for privacy, freedom of expression and access to knowledge, focusing on the  debate on technology, the internet and their regulation. https://itsrio.org/ en/en-home/   ●The International Federation for Human Rights is a globally active  NGO, supporting local actors and organisations to address human rights  abuse and further democratic processes. https://www.fidh.org/en/    ●Intervozes is an organisation that works for the realisation of the human  right to communication in Brazil, fighting for the right to communication,  freedom of expression, democratic media, and a free and plural internet.  https://intervozes.org.br    ●Robert Krimmer is a professor of e-governance at the University of Tartu  in Estonia and Tallinn University of Technology. His research focuses on 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook64 digital transformation, electronic participation and e-voting. https://www. robert.krimmer.ee/   ●Sophie Kwasny is one of the leading international experts on privacy  and Head of the Data Protection Unit of the Council of Europe. https:// www.coe.int/  ●Ronan McDermott is a freelance consultant currently based in Kyiv,  Ukraine. He has worked in various countries and regions on election  management; electoral support initiatives; and the use of technology for  elections, such as biometrics, voter registration and results management  systems. http://www.mcdis.com/  ●Privacy International (PI) has been working to promote the human  right of privacy throughout the world since 1990. It protects democracy,  defends people’s dignity and demands accountability from institutions  that breach the public trust. https://privacyinternational.org/    ●Red en Defensa de los Derechos Digitales is an organisation defending human rights in the digital domain. Based in Mexico, it focuses on  investigation, litigation and communication about freedom of expression,  privacy, non-discrimination, and access to information technologies and  knowledge. https://r3d.mx/    ●The Right2Know Campaign is a South African non-profit advocacy  organisation established in 2010 to reduce state secrecy in the drafting  of laws, increase access to information, and protect freedom of expression, especially on the internet. https://www.r2k.org.za    ●OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media has become an important voice for online media freedom and freedom of expression for the  OSCE region. https://www.osce.org/fom/representative  ●SMEX is an NGO based in Lebanon, advocating for digital rights in  Lebanon and the Arab region. The organisation provides research on  internet law and policy, advocates for an open and secure internet, tracks  digital rights violations, and produces resources to further best practices  online. https://smex.org/  
65References Access Now (2021). Shattered Dreams and Lost Opportunities. A Year in the Fight to  #KeepItOn. Report. March 2021. Retrieved 1 April 2021 from https://www.accessnow. org/cms/assets/uploads/2021/03/ KeepItOn-report- on-the- 2020-data_Mar-2021_3. pdf African Union (2014), Convention on Cyber Security and Personal Data Protection,  Adopted by the 23rd Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union, Malabo, 27th  June 2014. Retrieved 7 April 2021 from https://www.opennetafrica.org/?wpfb_dl=4   Bader, Max (2013), Crowdsourcing Election Monitoring in the 2011–2012 Russian  Elections. East European Politics, 29:4, 521–535, doi: 10.1080/21599165.2013.818979 CFI Media Development (n.d.), RightsInfo #InfosDroitsMauritanie. Retrieved 1 April  2021 from https://cfi.fr/en/project/rightsinfo Council of the European Union (2014a), Council Conclusions on a Rights-Based  Approach to Development Cooperation, Encompassing All Human Rights, Foreign  Affairs (Development) Council meeting, Brussels, 19 May 2014. Retrieved 10 February  2021 from https://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/EN/ foraff/142682.pdf   Council of the European Union (2014b), EU Human Rights Guidelines on Freedom  of Expression Online and Offline, Foreign Affairs Council meeting, Brussels, 12 May  2014. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/ cms_data/docs/pressdata/EN/foraff/142549.pdf   Council of the European Union (2014c), Recommendation CM/Rec(2014) of the  Committee of Ministers to Member States on a Guide to Human Rights for Internet  Users, Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 16 April 2014 at the 1197th 
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook66 meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies. Retrieved 10 June 2021 from https://rm.coe. int/16804d5b31 Council of the European Union (2015), Council Conclusions on Cyber Diplomacy,  Adopted by the General Affairs Council on 10 February 2015, Brussels, 11 February  2015. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/ document/ST-6122- 2015-INIT/en/pdf   Council of the European Union (2016), Outcome of the Council Meeting, 3504th  Council Foreign Affairs Development meeting, Brussels, 28 November 2016.  Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/22446/ st14969en16-v3.pdf   DG INTPA (Directorate-General for International Partnerships) (2020), Draft Note  to EU Delegations: Risks and Opportunities of Electoral Support. Internal reference:  Ares(2020)3301361. European Commission (2013), Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An  Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace, Joint Communication to the European Parliament,  the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee  of the Regions, Brussels, 7 February 2013. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from  https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/eu-cybersecurity- plan-protec t-open-internet- and-online- freedom-and- opportunity-cyber-security European Commission (2015), Operational Human Rights Guidance for EU External  Cooperation Actions Addressing Terrorism, Organised Crime and Cybersecurity:  Integrating the Rights-Based Approach. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https:// ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/system/files/manual-hr- guidance-ct- oc-cybe r-november-2015_en.pdf   European Commission (2017), Digital4Development: Mainstreaming Digital  Technologies and Services into EU Development Policy, Commission Staff Working  Document, Brussels, 2 May 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://ec.europa. eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/10102/2017/EN/SWD-2017- 157-F1- EN-MAIN- PART-1. PDF European Commission (2018), Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament  and of the Council Establishing the Neighbourhood, Development and International  Cooperation Instrument, Explanatory Memorandum (COM(2018)460), 14 July 2018. 
References67 Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?ur i=COM%3A2018%3A460%3AFIN   European Commission (2020a), EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy  2020–2024, Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council,  25 March 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ resource.html?uri=cellar:e9112a36-6e95- 11ea-b735-01aa75ed71a1.0002.02/ DOC_4&format=PDF   European Commission (2020b), Communication from the Commission to the  European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and  the Committee of the Regions, On the European Democracy Action Plan, 3 December  2020. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ TXT/?uri=COM%3A2020%3A790%3AFIN&qid=1607079662423   European Commission (2021), Applying the Human Rights Based Approach to international partnerships: An updated Toolbox for placing rights-holders at the centre  of EU’s Neighbourhood, Development and International Cooperation, Commission  Staff Working Document (SWD(2021) 179 final), Brussels, 30 July 2021. Retrieved  10 February 2021 from https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/system/files/ swd-2021- human-right- based-approach_en.pdf European Parliament and Council of Europe (2016), Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of  the European Parliament and of the Council of Europe on the Protection of Natural  Persons with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of  Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation –  GDPR). Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:2016:119:FULL&from=EN GIZ (German Corporation for International Cooperation GmbH) (n.d.a), Improvement  of Public Services. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://www.giz.de/en/ worldwide/36607.html   GIZ (German Corporation for International Cooperation GmbH) (n.d.b), Modernisation  de la Cour Suprême (cloturé). Retrieved 5 February 2021 from https://www.giz.de/ en/worldwide/42325.html   GovLab (n.d.), Mudamos. The Citizen Initiative App. Retrieved 1 April 2021 from  https://congress.crowd.law/case-mudamos.html
Democracy and Digitalisation Handbook68 Hauswedell, Charlotte (2014), Palestine: New discussion platform for Nablus  citizens. Retrieved 1 April 2021 from https://www.dw.com/en/palestine-ne w-discussion-platform- for-nablus-citizens/a-17496446 Human Rights Watch (2021), Tajikistan. Events of 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2021 from  https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2021/country-chapters/tajikistan ICNL (International Center for Not-for-Profit Law) (2020), Tajikistan. Retrieved 1 April  from https://www.icnl.org/resources/civic-freedom-monitor/tajikistan ITS (n.d.a), Atrapabot. Dismantling Disinformation Botnets in Latin America. Retrieved  June 29 from https://itsrio.org/en/projetos/atrapabot-en/ ITS (n.d.b), PegaBot. Bot or not? Test Different Twitter Profiles to Find Out Who is a  Bot. Retrieved 6 April 2021 from https://itsrio.org/en/projetos/pega-bot/ Konopacki, Marco, Debora Albu and Fabro Steibel (2019), MUDAMOS: A Civil Society  Initiative on Collaborative Lawmaking in Brazil. ICEGOV2019, 3–5 April 2019,  Melbourne, VIC, Australia Krimmer, Robert (2017), Internet Voting in Austria: History, Development, and Building  Blocks for the Future. Doctoral Thesis WU Vienna University of Economics and  Business. Retrieved 6 April 2021 from https://epub.wu.ac.at/5781/ Numan, Jamal and Saed-Abu Helwa (2015), Palestine uses GIS to Centrally Manage  Urban Development. ArcNews Summer 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2021 from  https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/arcnews/ palestine-uses -gis-to -centrally-m anage- urban-development/ OECD (2013), The OECD Privacy Framework, Organisation for Economic Co-operation  and Development. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://www.oecd.org/sti/ ieconomy/oecd_privacy_framework.pdf Sanderson, Sertan (2020), Press Freedom in Tajikistan: Going from Bad to Worse.  Retrieved 1 April 2021 from https://www.dw.com/en/press-freedom- in-tajikista n-going-from- bad-to-worse/a-53697778 Schoemaker, Emrys (2016), Digital Faith: Social Media and the Enactment of Religious  Identity in Pakistan. Retrieved 14 June from http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/3578/
References69 Toolkit Digitalisierung (2021), Datenmärkte in Afrika. Retrieved 22 February 2021  from https://toolkit-digitalisierung.de/datenmaerkte-in-afrika/   TRT WorldNow (2021). Internet Crackdown: 93 Major Internet Shutdowns Took Place  in 2020. Interview with Ben Wagner. Retrieved 17 February 2021 from https://www. youtube.com/watch?v=uFZ8T1eNCoc United Nations (1990), Guidelines for the Regulation of Computerized Personal  Data Files. Retrieved 10 February 2021 from https://digitallibrary.un.org/ record/162033?ln=en Waugaman, Adele (2016), From Principle to Practice: Implementing the Principles  for Digital Development, Washington, DC: The Principles for Digital Development  Working Group. Retrieved 7 April from https://digitalprinciples.org/wp-content/ uploads/From_Principle_to_Practice_v5.pdf  
70EU project list OrganisationProject name/ information Project number EU Delegation  KyrgyzstanBuilding Resistance in Youth  in Central Asia (BRYCA) to the  influence of illegal hate speech  and misinformation online and  on social mediaEIDHR/2019/410-636  (EC) EU Delegation  Sierra LeoneMeeting Critical Infrastructure  and Technology Needs in the  Parliament of Sierra LeoneFED/2019/410-585  (EC) EU Delegation  TajikistanSupport to Civil Registry  System Reformnone Institute for  Technology and  Society of Rio de  Janeiro (ITS Rio),  BrazilExposing bot disinformation in  BrazilEIDHR/2019/410-633  (EC) GIZ Egypt Strengthening Reform  Initiatives in the Public  AdministrationENI/2017/385-537 (EC) GIZ Sri Lanka Strengthening Reconciliation  Processes in Sri Lanka  (co-funded by EU)ACA/2017/385-379  (EC)
Getting in touch with the EU In person All over the European Union there are hundreds of Europe Direct  information centres. You can find the address of the centre nearest  you at: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_en On the phone or by email Europe Direct is a service that answers your questions about the  European Union. You can contact this service:  ●by freephone: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11 (certain operators may  charge for these calls),  ●at the following standard number: +32 22999696 or   ●by email via: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_en Finding information about the EU Online Information about the European Union in all the official languages  of the EU is available on the Europa website at: https://europa.eu/ european-union/index_en EU publications You can download or order free and priced EU publications at: https:// publications.europa.eu/en/publications . Multiple copies of free  publications may be obtained by contacting Europe Direct or your  local information centre (see https://europa.eu/european-union/ contact_en ). EU law and related documents For access to legal information from the EU, including all EU law  since 1952 in all the official language versions, go to EUR-Lex at:  http://eur-lex.europa.eu Open data from the EU The EU Open Data Portal ( http://data.europa.eu/euodp/en ) provides  access to datasets from the EU. Data can be downloaded and  reused for free, for both commercial and non-commercial purposes.
MN-01-21-392-EN-N 
