Centering Racial Equity  Throughout   Data Integration A TOOLKIT FOR  
Societal “progress” is often marked by the construction of new  infrastructure that fuels change and innovation. Just as railroads  and interstate highways were the defining infrastructure projects  of the 1800 and 1900s, the development of data infrastructure is a  critical innovation of our century.  Railroads and highways were drivers of development and prosperity  for some investors and sites. Yet other individuals and communities  were harmed, displaced, bypassed, ignored, and forgotten by   those efforts.  As railroads and highways both developed and  decimated communities, so too can data infrastructure.  At this moment in our history, we can co-create data infrastructure  to promote racial equity and the public good, or we can invest  in data infrastructure that disregards the historical, social, and  political context—reinforcing racial inequity that continues to  harm communities. Building data infrastructure without a racial  equity lens and understanding of historical context will exacerbate  existing inequalities along the lines of race, gender, class, and  ability. Instead, we commit to contextualize our work in the  historical and structural oppression that shapes it, and organize  stakeholders across geography, sector, and experience to center  racial equity throughout data integration. 
1 INTRODUCTION  Introduction Data sharing and data integration to inform decision making across government entities is now  commonplace, and occurs at every level—local, state, and federal. While most data sharing  and integration occurs within a legal and governance framework, an emphasis on racial equity,  transparency, and community engagement is often peripheral. This is especially troubling because  government policies and programs that produce administrative data have often played a direct role  in creating, enabling, and sustaining institutional and structural racism.  We aim to change this.  With trust in government and experts (e.g., researchers) at historic lows,1 efforts that rely exclusively  on these institutions to “use data to solve social problems” are unlikely to succeed. Too often  government organizations and their research partners fail to identify and address issues of bias in  data. Further, even if such issues are identified, these organizations are not equipped to repair trust  with communities that have experienced harm.  This body of work seeks to encourage shifts of awareness and practice, by centering racial equity  and community voice within the context of data integration and use. Our vision is one of ethical  data use with a racial equity lens, that supports power sharing and building across agencies and  community members.     Racial equity  is the condition where one’s racial identity no longer  influences how one fares in society. This includes the creation of  racially just policies, practices, attitudes, and cultural messages, and  the elimination of structures that reinforce differential experiences and  outcomes by race.2     Administrative data  are data collected during the routine process of  administering programs.    Administrative data reuse  involves using these data in a way not  originally intended (e.g., for research).    Cross-sector data sharing  is the practice of providing access to  information not otherwise available across agencies.     Data integration  involves data sharing that includes identifiable  information (e.g, name, date of birth, SSN), so that records can be linked,  or integrated at the individual level. Data sharing and data integration involve significant privacy risks, and  all data use should be carefully considered to ensure sharing is legal and  ethical, with a purpose that can be linked to action to improve outcomes. 1   Rainie, L., Keeter, S., & Perrin, A.  (2019, December 31) 2  Racial Equity Tools (n.d.), Glossary  
2 INTRODUCTIONWhy Data Infrastructure   + Racial Equity?  Cross-sector data sharing and integration enable the transformation of individual-level information  into actionable intelligence that can be used to understand urgent and long-term community  needs; improve services, systems, and practices; develop innovative policies and interventions;  and, ultimately, build stronger communities. Yet, the way that cross-sector data are used can also  reinforce legacies of racist policies and produce inequitable resource allocation, access, and  outcomes.   We understand structural racism as the normalization and legitimization  of historical, cultural, institutional, and interpersonal dynamics that  advantage Whites, “while producing cumulative and chronic adverse  outcomes for People of Color.” Embedded within structural racism is  institutional racism, the ways “policies and practices of organizations  or parts of systems (schools, courts, transportation, etc.) create different  outcomes for different racial groups”3 (see Appendix II). Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPoC)4 and/or people living in poverty are often overrepresented within government agency data systems, and disparate representation in data can  cause disparate impact.5 Laws, policies, business rules, and narratives are permeated by structural  racism, which is the root cause of the racial disparities evident in system outcomes. Such disparities  are often sterilized by well-intentioned names (e.g., “disproportionate contact” in criminal justice  or the “achievement gap” in education) that hide the social consequence of structural racism: that,  as a group, Black, Indigenous, and people of color in America have worse outcomes in many human  service system outcome measures regardless of socioeconomic status.6 And yet, many agency  solutions and data initiatives are largely disconnected from this root cause, and the “hunt for more  data is [often] a barrier for acting on what we already know.”7   3  Racial Equity Tools (n.d.), Core Concepts: Racism 4  We intentionally use the acronym BIPoC (Black, Indigenous, people of color) as a term that seeks to recognize the unique  experience of Black and Indigenous People within the United States. We recognize that naming is power, and we remain com mitted to using language that supports pro-Blackness and Native visibility, while dismantling white supremacy.  5   Barocas, S., & Selbst, A. D. (2016) 6   Hayes-Greene, D., & Love, B. P. (2018) 7   Benjamin, R. (2019)  
3 INTRODUCTIONWith this knowledge, we call for re-users of administrative data to center racial equity in data  practice. We call for the inclusion of community voices and power sharing at every stage of design,  use, and implementation. We call for relationship building among those represented in the data and  those using the data. Without a deliberate effort to address structural racism, institutional racism,  and unrecognized bias, data integration will inevitably reproduce and exacerbate existing harm.    To avoid this, we must embed questions of racial equity throughout the data life cycle:    In planning    In data collection    In data access    In algorithms/use of statistical tools    In data analysis    In reporting and dissemination   We are at a pivotal moment, one in which the use of data is accelerating in both exciting and  concerning ways. We have access to greater amounts of data than at any other point in our history,  but privacy laws and practice lag behind, placing Black, Indigenous, and communities of color at the  greatest risk of the “data-ification of injustice.”8 Acknowledging history, harm, and the potentially negative implications of data integration for groups  marginalized by inequitable systems is a key first step, but it is only a first step. To go beyond this, we  must center the voices, stories, expertise, and knowledge of these communities in decision making,  and take collective action with shared power to improve outcomes and harness data for social good. We are working to create a new kind of data infrastructure— one that dismantles ‘feedback loops of injustice’9 and instead  shares power and knowledge with those who need systems  change the most.  Will you join us? 8   Benjamin, R. (2019)   9   Eubanks, V. (2018)  
4 INTRODUCTIONContents 1   Introduction 2   Why Data Infrastructure + Racial Equity? 5   Who We Are 7   How to Use This Toolkit 7   Who Should Use This Toolkit 8   Get Started 12   Benefits, Limitations, & Risks 14   Centering Racial Equity Throughout the Data Life Cycle 15   Racial Equity in Planning 18   Racial Equity in Data Collection 21   Racial Equity in Data Access 25   Racial Equity in Algorithms/Statistical Tools 28   Racial Equity in Data Analysis 30   Racial Equity in Reporting and Dissemination 33   What Next? 34   Toolkit Activity 1: Who Should Be at the Table? 40   Toolkit Activity 2: Mapping Assets and Engaging Community 44   Toolkit Activity 3: Identifying Root Causes through Factor Analysis 47   References 50   Appendix I: Work in Action Throughout the Data Life Cycle 50   Racial Equity in Planning: Work in Action 53   Racial Equity in Data Collection: Work in Action 56  Racial Equity in Data Access: Work in Action 59   Racial Equity in Algorithms / Use of Statistical Tools: Work in Action 61   Racial Equity in Data Analysis: Work in Action 63   Racial Equity in Reporting and Dissemination: Work in Action 68   Appendix II: Terms 70   Appendix III: Expanded Civic Data User Profiles 72   Appendix IV: Resources
5 INTRODUCTIONWho We Are   We are a diverse group of civic data stakeholders, including community advocates, staff of local and  national nonprofit organizations, university-based and applied researchers, state and local government  administrators and analysts, foundation staff, and service providers. We have worked together  since May 2019 to co-create strategies and identify best practices for administrative data reuse for  government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and data collaboratives that center racial equity and  gives power to community voice. Specifically, our work seeks to help agencies acknowledge and  compensate for the harms and bias baked into data and data structures, into practice, and into cultural  understandings and perceptions of populations served by government agencies.   WORKGROUP CONTRIBUTORS Niiobli Armah, My Brother’s Keeper, Equity Intelligence Platform Bridget Blount, Baltimore’s Promise Angela Bluhm, Chief Education Office, State of Oregon Katy Collins, Allegheny County Department of Human Services Sheila Dugan, GovEx, Johns Hopkins University Sue Gallagher, Broward Data Collaborative, Children’s Services Council of Broward County Laura Jones, Writer and Community Advocate based in Minnesota Chris Kingsley, Annie E. Casey Foundation Ritika Sharma Kurup, StriveTogether Tamika Lewis, Our Data Bodies Rick Little, Utah Dept of Human Services, Management Information Center Tawana Petty, Detroit Community Technology Project & Our Data Bodies Raintry Salk, Race Forward and Government Alliance for Racial Equity (GARE) Michelle Shevin, Ford Foundation   SITE-BASED CONTRIBUTORS Allegheny County (PA), Department of Human Services, Office of Analytics, Technology, & Planning,  Samantha Loaney, Brian Bell, Ellen Kitzerow, Julia Reuben, Shannon Flynn, & Jamaal Davis Allegheny County (PA) Department of Human Services, Office of Equity & Inclusion,  Shauna Lucadamo & Jessica Ruffin Automating.NYC, Deepra Yusuf, Elyse Voegeli, Akina Younge, & Jon Truong Birth through Eight Strategy for Tulsa (BEST), Jessica England & Dan Sterba Children’s Services Council of Broward County (FL), Sue Gallagher City of Asheville (NC), Christen McNamara & Kimberlee Archie City of Tacoma (WA), Alison Beason DataWorks NC, Libby McClure & John Killeen
6 INTRODUCTIONKentucky Center for Statistics, Jessica Cunningham Mecklenburg County (NC) Community Support Services, Courtney LaCaria & Mary Ann Priester New York City Administration for Children’s Services & Youth Studies Programs at the CUNY School  of Professional Studies, Sarah Zeller-Berkman Take Control Initiative (OK), Emma Swepston, Laura Bellis, & Brandy Hammons   AISP CONTRIBUTORS Lead author: Amy Hawn Nelson, PhD Della Jenkins Sharon Zanti Matthew Katz Emily Berkowitz TC Burnett Dennis Culhane, PhD We also recognize individuals who provided external review of this toolkit, including Jessica  Cunningham, Marcus Gaddy, Logan Koepke, Michelle Massie, and Jasmine McNealy.   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   The authors wish to express their gratitude to the Annie E. Casey Foundation, as well as the other  members of the Data Funders Collaborative who supported this work. Suggested Citation: Hawn Nelson, A., Jenkins, D., Zanti, S., Katz, M., Berkowitz, E., et al. (2020). A Toolkit for  Centering Racial Equity Throughout Data Integration. Actionable Intelligence for Social  Policy, University of Pennsylvania. https://www.aisp.upenn.edu/  
7 HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKIT  How to Use This Toolkit This toolkit is designed to help guide partnerships, collaboratives, agencies, and community  initiatives seeking to center racial equity while using, sharing, and integrating administrative  data. Not sure what we mean by using, sharing, and integrating administrative data? Take  some time to review our Introduction to Introduction to Data Sharing & Integration ,10 which covers  key terms, concepts, and first steps. Who Should Use This Toolkit  We believe that all voices are needed in conversations about racial equity and data use, and the  information presented here can be used by anyone. This toolkit and activities are specifically  structured to support users of administrative data for civic purposes  (see Appendix III) in their  efforts to center racial equity. These users could include:     Members of institutions: university-based researchers; government-agency  administrators and analysts; foundation staff     Community advocates and members: community and religious leaders; civic and  neighborhood association members; students and parents/caregivers     Bridges between community and organizations: service providers, social workers, case  workers; staff of local backbone organizations; independent applied researchers Many types of civic data use are relevant to this toolkit, including:     Open data (data that can be shared without legal agreements in place)     Protected administrative data (confidential data that can be shared only with sufficient  security provisions in place, including data sharing agreements)    Dashboards (administrative data aggregated to topic/indicator/subgroup/population)     Integrated data systems (systems that regularly link administrative data across government  agencies to improve programs and practices through evidence-based collaboration)    Neighborhood indicators (data aggregated to place)    Research, evaluation, and outcome measurement using administrative data    Tools created by using administrative data, such as risk indicator scores  10   See Introduction to Data Sharing & Integration. (2020). Actionable Intelligence for Social Policy. 
8 HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKITWE STRONGLY ENCOURAGE: u Inclusive participatory governance around data access and use u Social license for data access and use u  A developmental approach to data sharing and integration—start small  and grow WE DISCOURAGE: u Broad access to individual-level linked data u Data use for enforcement or investigation actions against residents u  Use of predictive algorithms without determining responsibility,  explainability, accuracy, auditability, and fairness11 u  Use of linked data across institutions that have patterns of institutional  racism, specifically, law enforcement, which has demonstrated  significant racialized harm without sufficient safeguards in place Get Started We recommend use of the following framework outlined by the Government Alliance for Racial Equity  (GARE) to normalize, organize, and operationalize12 racial equity throughout data integration.  We urge you to begin by thinking through the questions listed below to better understand your  individual and institutional starting point for centering racial equity throughout data integration.  Next, use the core questions in each of the Normalize, Organize, and Operationalize sections to  reflect on ways that you and your organization can continue to grow in these areas. The links and  activities included in each section will help you further assess and take action toward centering  racial equity. It is important to note that this work is not linear, but iterative. This toolkit is  intentionally modular, and we encourage you to use sections as needed in order to move the work  of your organization forward. 11   Diakopoulos, N., et al. (2017)   12  Nelson, J., & Brooks, L. (2015)
9 HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKITVISUALIZEOPERATIONALIZE    Raci al equity tools      Data to develop   strategies & drive results    A shared analysis &  definitions      Ur gency/prioritizeNORMALIZE      Int ernal infrastructure     PartnershipsORGANIZE Source: GARE Communications Guide, May 2018. Normalize How has your lead agency/collaborative acknowledged the importance of a racial equity lens and  demonstrated a commitment to engage in data integration efforts that are legal, are ethical, and center equity? Assess your current activities using these resources:    Data Ethics Workbook, UK Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport      Tool for Organizational Self-Assessment Related to Racial Equity , Coalition  o f Communities of Color We recommend these resources to move forward:     Advancing Racial Equity and Transforming Government: A Resource Guide to   Put Ideas into Action , Government Alliance on Race & Equity (GARE)     Racial Equity Toolkit: An Opportunity to Operationalize Equity , Government Alliance   on Race & Equity (GARE)    Awake to Woke to Work, Equity in the Center, a Project of ProInspire
10 HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKITOrganize In your site context, how will the community and government learn, work, and be mutually  accountable for using integrated data to inform, evaluate, and co-create structures, policies, practices, and narratives for equity? Questions to guide your thinking should include:     Ho w will community expertise be forefront throughout the data life cycle?   What capacity will need to be developed to ensure that this occurs? uIn planning u In data collection u In data access u In algorithms/use of statistical tools u In data analysis u In reporting and dissemination     Ho w will data use help communities interrogate systems, rather than just inform how to “treat”  communities with additional services and programs?      How will a racial equity lens be incorporated throughout the data life cycle?       How will the culture, policies, practices, and expectations of the agency/collaborative shift to  center racial equity?      Ho w will the agency/collaborative initially focus upon, continuously learn from, and sustain  institutional-systems change? Operationalize What approaches will be most effective for integrated data infrastructure development  and data use?     For policy makers, agency, and community capacity building?     For collaborating and power sharing among stakeholders?     For centering community? 1. Internal considerations for agency/collaborative a.  Wha t work has been done with your policy leaders, agency directors, department staff,  and front-line employees to prepare them for this work? b. Where will you start?c. Who is best prepared to lead this work, and what resources will they receive? 2. Internal AND external considerations for agency/collaborative  a.  Ho w will the agency/collaborative engage with community members, and in what manner?  b.  Wh o will hold the agency/collaborative accountable?  c.   Ho w will the agency/collaborative ensure that the benefits of data integration outweigh  the risks? 
11 HOW TO USE THIS TOOLKIT3. Community  considerations  a.  How will community members/people whose data are in the system receive capacitybuilding? What structures will be implemented, including funding, training, and ongoing  relationship building? b. What role does community organizing play in the design and use of data?  c.  What guides accountability and power sharing between community members/ participants and policy makers/agency?  Our Approach Source: GARE Communications Guide, May 2018.NORMALIZE ORGANIZE OPERATIONALIZE USE A RACIAL EQUITY  FRAMEWORK Jurisdictions need to use a  racial equity framework that  clearly names the history of  government in creating and  maintaining racial inequities;  envisions and operationalizes  a new role; and utilizes  clear and easily understood  definitions of racial equity  and inequity.  COMMUNICATE &   ACT WITH URGENCY Despite the belief that change  is hard and takes time, we  have seen repeatedly that  when racial equity is an  urgently felt priority, change  can be embraced and take  place quickly. Building in  institutional accountability  mechanisms via a clear  plan of action will allow  accountability. Collectively,  we must create greater  urgency and public will to  achieve racial equity.  BUILD ORGANIZATIONAL  CAPACITY Jurisdictions need to be  committed to the breadth  and depth of institutional  transformation. While  the leadership of elected  members and top officials is  critical, changes take place on  the ground, and infrastructure  that creates racial equity  experts and teams throughout  local and regional government  is necessary. PARTNER WITH OTHER  INSTITUTIONS &  COMMUNITIES To achieve racial equity, local  and regional government  must work with a network  of partners: institutions,  business, education,  philanthropy, among others,  and center the work on  impacted communities. IMPLEMENT RACIAL   EQUITY TOOLS Racial inequities are not  random—they have been  created and sustained  over time. Inequities will  not disappear on their  own. Tools must be used  to change the policies,  programs, and practices  that are perpetuating  inequities, as well as used  in the development of new  policies and programs.  BE DATA-DRIVEN Measurement must take  place at two levels — first,  to measure the success of  specific programmatic and  policy changes, and second,  to develop baselines, set  goals, and measure progress  towards community goals.
12 BENEFITS, LIMITATIONS, & RISKSBenefits, Limitations, & Risks After assessing your agencies’ readiness through the questions and concepts in the previous  section, we encourage you to then consider specific examples of data sharing and integration. Because of the complexity inherent in civic data use, it is essential to carefully consider the  benefits, limitations, and risks of each potential use.  Benefits:     Whole-person view: When data are integrated across multiple sources, we get a more  holistic view of the experiences and outcomes of children, households, and families, supporting asset- (rather than deficit- ) based approaches. Such views allow analysts to identify bright spots across communities, families, and individuals, and, ultimately, encourage investment in policies and programs that work.      Scale: Analysis using administrative data can include a whole population, rather than a sample, with longitudinal views and comparison groups readily available.     Time & cost: Reusing administrative data originally collected in the course of service  delivery to answer important implementation and evaluation questions can be less time-  and resource-intensive than collecting new data using surveys or other means. Limitations:     Availability: Since administrative data were originally collected by agencies for operational purposes, certain information will not be captured in these records.     Quality: Since administrative data are not collected for research purposes, data quality issues are common, including missing data, lack of data documentation, and questions related to reliability and validity.     Access: Many agencies do not have clear processes and procedures for sharing administrative data, which can make the process of gaining access difficult and time-consuming. Risks:      Privacy disclosure: The transfer of data includes the risk of data being accessed improperly, either by accident, through a security breach, or as a result of insufficient anonymization techniques. Such instances are rare with appropriate safeguards in place, but important  to consider.      Misuse of data for research and evaluation: When data originally collected for administrative rather than analytic purposes are used for research, there is a risk that they may be misused or misinterpreted. Potential traps include the misuse of data as a result of an inappropriate analytic plan (e.g., using inferential statistics with an insufficient sample size), misuse of a variable (e.g., incorrectly assuming that “PRGENT” refers to date of program entry rather than to completed program entrance exam), or the inclusion of incorrect assumptions when explaining outcomes (e.g., explaining a reduction in out-of-school suspensions as being a positive indicator of improved climate, without knowing about a code of conduct revision that encouraged administrators to report suspensions differently). 
13 BENEFITS, LIMITATIONS, & RISKS    Replicating structural racism:  Since administrative data are collected during the  administration of programs and services for individuals in need of social supports, the data  include people who are disproportionately living in poverty, who, as a result of the historical  legacy of race in America, are disproportionately Black, Indigenous, and people of color.  Seeing data as race-neutral is inaccurate, and such views could lead to system-level data  usage that unintentionally replicates structural racism.      Harming individuals:  Certain individual-level uses of administrative data carry particularly  high risks of causing personal harm. These include uses that provide case workers, service  providers, teachers, law enforcement, etc., with personal information that could lead to  biased treatments or punitive action, or lengthen system involvement. While the particulars are important, we have identified broad categories of use on the risk vs. benefit  matrix below.  For example, projects that involve low risk and high benefit, such as a longitudinal program  evaluation, indicator projects, or generating unduplicated counts across programs, are generally a  good idea and an easy starting point for collaboration. Conversely, projects that are low benefit and  high risk, such as linking social media content with educational records  or police surveillance using  biometric data , should be considered with the utmost caution, and in some instances data sharing  should not proceed. Examples included in this toolkit are not meant to be used as binary yes/no decision-making  tools, but rather as guides for thinking about and talking through intended and unintended  consequences of civic data use with a variety of voices and perspectives.  Mapping indicators to allocate   new investments to high-need  neighborhoods Program evaluation with  longitudinal outcomes Unduplicated counts of children   across early childhood program Open data initiatives   that publish aggregate   data sets Linking individual data   on wages & earnings  Case management   algorithms Using “risk scores” to   target interventions Predictive analytics   in policing Tracking social media on students Linking biometric data   (e.g., facial recognition)BENEFIT RISKHIGH HIGH LOW
14 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLE   Centering Racial Equity   Throughout the Data Life Cycle Centering racial equity throughout data integration is not a single, discrete step, but rather an  ongoing process at each stage of the data life cycle—planning, data collection, data access,  use of algorithms and statistical tools, data analysis, and reporting and dissemination. Each  stage presents new opportunities to bring a racial equity frame to data integration, as well as new  challenges and considerations.  The following sections provide an overview of racial equity considerations throughout the data life  cycle, examples of positive and problematic practices, and brief examples of Work in Action. The  Work in Action examples highlight current site-based work taking place at each stage of the data life  cycle. Full-length versions of these examples of centering racial equity throughout the data life  cycle are in Appendix I.DATA ACCESSDATA ANALYSISREPORTING &   DISSEMINATION USE OF ALGORITHMS/  STATISTICAL TOOLS PLANNING DATA COLLECTION
15 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Planning  Planning is the first stage of the data life cycle and includes all work to prepare for future stages,  such as identifying stakeholders (see Toolkit Activity 1 ); convening work groups; articulating a  mission or purpose for data integration; developing understanding of the local racial, social, and  historical context (see Toolkit Activity 2 ); creating ethical guidelines for use; and developing a  project plan. It is a common mistake to let the forward momentum and looming deadlines at the  outset of a data project overshadow upfront equity work. However, bringing a racial equity frame to  the planning stage will help set the standard for infusing racial equity throughout the rest of the data  life cycle, making it a crucial first step.  During this stage, first ask:  Why is this work necessary?  Who does the work benefit?     How does it benefit the community at large?   Who can the process/product harm?  These questions will help identify stakeholders, establish a project plan, and create a framework to  center racial equity throughout the data life cycle. Need more information to get started? Start with Chicago Beyond (2019),   Why am I always being researched? A guidebook for community organizations,  researchers, and funders to help us get from insufficient understanding to more  authentic truth . 
16 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Planning:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE Including diverse perspectives (such as  community members with lived experiences  and agency staff who understand the data) on  planning committeesUsing only token “representation” in agendasetting, question creation, governance,   or IRB review Building capacity for researchers,  administrators, and community participants to  work together on agenda-settingUsing deadlines or grant deliverables as an  excuse to rush or avoid authentic community  engagement Researching, understanding, and disseminating  the history of local policies, systems, and  structures involved, including past harms and  future opportunities Using only historical administrative data to  describe the problem, without a clear plan of  action to improve outcomes Building data literacy among organizations  and community members, which could  range from light engagement through public  activities like data “gallery walks” to more  intense involvement, such as community-based  participatory action researchFailing to manage expectations around what  the data are capable of telling or how long it will  take to see marked changes in data, actions, and  outcomes Establishing a common language and agreed  upon sources and methods for reporting on  community-based indicatorsFailing to revisit indicator and outcome metrics  regularly and revise when necessary Clearly discerning who decides how to frame  the problem or determine what questions   to askRelying on academic institutions to frame the  problem and research questions while failing to  engage community-based organizations Planning that includes the use of an asset;  creating a framework that aims to clarify  how to improve policy, services, and outcomesPlanning that includes the use of a deficit;  creating a framework to describe outcomes Lifting up the research needs of community to  funders; helping shape funding strategy with  funders to support community-driven researchAccepting grant/philanthropic funding for   a project that is not a community priority   or need
17 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Planning:   WORK IN ACTION Broward Data Collaborative  by Sue Gallagher Created in 2017, the Broward Data Collaborative (BDC) seeks to improve the outcomes of residents  by integrating data from multiple sources to inform evaluation, research, and care coordination.  The BDC consists of Broward County Public Schools, Broward County Human Services Department,  Broward Behavioral Health Coalition, Florida Departments of Children and Families and Juvenile  Justice, Early Learning Coalition of Broward, and the Children’s Services Council of Broward  County (which acts as the BDC backbone organization). In planning the BDC, the Children’s Services  Council of Broward County used a Community Participatory Action Research (CPAR) framework to  operationalize their core values of equity and transparency and account for the historical and current  structural racism perpetuated by the community’s systems and organizations. The CPAR framework  aims to help the BDC create racially equitable structures by involving system participants in the  process of governance, research, evaluation, and solution creation to address the racial, economic,  and social/spatial gaps that are all too common between the predominantly White researchers  governing integrated data systems and the BIPoC using public services.  Through this planning process, the BDC has worked to provide a seat at the proverbial (and literal) table  for youth and residents whose data are represented in the child-serving integrated data system. The  BDC’s recognition that their county-level systems produce racially disparate outcomes has allowed  them to build nonhierarchical relationships between the community and professionals. In planning,  the BDC is creating an integrated data system that allows them to share strengths-based stories about  their community and community members and use data to co-create system and policy improvements.  Tacoma Equity Index  by Alison Beason The City of Tacoma, Washington, created a Strategic Visioning Framework to guide the city’s  decision making through 2025. Collaborating with community members and groups during this  planning process helped center themes of equity, opportunity, partnerships, and accountability  in Tacoma’s strategic vision. As a result, Tacoma established both the Equity and Empowerment  Initiative and the Office of Equity and Human Rights to operationalize the city’s strategic vision for  service delivery around inclusivity and accessibility. Working with the Kirwan Institute of Race and  Social Justice at The Ohio State University, the City of Tacoma created an Equity Index to measure  social mobility in the city. Drawing from the concept of opportunity mapping, the Equity Index uses  20 indicators—aligned with the city’s strategic goals—to measure opportunity and equity in the city.  To date, the tool has been used to inform community conversations on equity and disparities and to  guide policy makers’ approaches to decision making and resource allocation.
18 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Collection  Data collection is the process of gathering information to inform the study of a program, policy,  or problem. Administrative data are typically collected for operational purposes, whereas other  data collection efforts may arise from specific research or evaluation questions. Across agencies  and programs, administrative data collection can look vastly different. For instance, data can be  collected from participant intake paperwork, self-reported online applications, service payment  records, participant surveys, or any other place where data have been collected to administer or  evaluate programs or services. While there are significant benefits to administrative data use, it is critical to understand that  administrative data are collected for purposes other than research and therefore pose some  potential risks. Most relevant for centering racial equity, administrative data are vulnerable to  biases, inaccuracies, and incomplete or missing data, and most often include communities that are  over-surveilled by government agencies. Implicit bias within data is commonplace and most often  takes the form of selection bias (i.e., the individuals included in the data are not random or do not  represent the intended population) or confirmation bias (i.e., data are used to confirm pre-existing  beliefs). An equity lens considers these inherent vulnerabilities to the data collection process and  how they can be reduced or contextualized appropriately in response. Remaining aware of one’s own  biases is an important first step. Intersectionality refers to the interconnected identities of an individual—   including race, gender identity, nationality, sexual orientation, and disability.  Collecting demographic data to better understand disparate impact based  upon intersectionality can be an important step toward equity.    “Intersectionality is simply a prism to see the interactive effects of various forms of discrimination  and disempowerment. It looks at the way that racism, many times, interacts with patriarchy,  heterosexism, classism, xenophobia—seeing that the overlapping vulnerabilities created by these  systems actually create specific kinds of challenges. ‘Intersectionality 102,’ then, is to say that  these distinct problems create challenges for movements that are only organized around these  problems as separate and individual. So when racial justice doesn’t have a critique of patriarchy  and homophobia, the particular way that racism is experienced and exacerbated by heterosexism,  classism, etc., falls outside of our political organizing. It means that significant numbers of people  in our communities aren’t being served by social justice frames because they don’t address the  particular ways that they’re experiencing discrimination.” — Kimberlé Williams Crenshaw13 13   Quoted in Guobadia, O. (2018), Kimberle Crenshaw and Lady Phyll Talk Intersectionality, Solidarity, and Self-Care . 
19 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Collection:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE Adhering to data management best practices to  secure data as they are collected—specifically,  with carefully considered, role-based access Assuming that programmatic staff (those  most likely to collect data) have training in data  management and data security   Including agency staff and community  stakeholders in defining which data should be  collected or reusedInviting only researchers to identify data needs Collaborating to develop a shared data collection  agenda that is connected to practice, policy, and  researchCollecting data that reinforces or confirms  bias rather than informing practice and policy  changes Collaborating with agencies and community to  generate a data development agenda—a plan for  access and use of data that are needed to answer  high-interest questions (e.g., expanding gender  identity categories on a registration form; building  support for digitizing eviction records)Providing insufficient data labels (e.g., federal  reporting in education has only seven race  labels) or inconsistent categories across data  sets (e.g., conflating race and ethnicity) Working with staff to support equity-oriented  data collection practices (e.g., programmatic staff  to update a registration form, technical staff to  update a “forced” field on a data entry platform) Unwillingness to shift data collection practices  based upon community feedback Collecting only what is necessary to your context Failing to consider which data carry an  elevated risk of causing harm if redisclosed  when determining which data to collect in your  context (e.g., a housing program that collects  resident HIV status) Strong efforts to support metadata documentation,  including key dimensions of metadata such as:    description                                provenance    technical specifications    rights    preservation                             citationFailure to clearly identify, explain, and  document data integrity issues, including data  that are:  inaccurate    undocumented    unavailable  incomplete   inconsistent Including qualitative stories to contextualize  quantitative dataAllowing quantitative data to “speak for itself”  without context or discussion Working with and developing flexible data systems  that adapt to context, environment, or system  changesWorking with and developing data systems that  are static and offer limited access Finding out why people “opt out” of providing data  for surveys and other data collection efforts, and  using their feedback to minimize harm in future  data collection processesCollecting data purely for surveilling   groups marginalized by inequitable systems  and BIPoC. 
20 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Collection:   WORK IN ACTION Mecklenburg County Community Support Services    by Courtney Morton & Mary Ann Priester In 2014, North Carolina’s Mecklenburg County Community Support Services invested in two new  positions tasked with improving data collection, data access, and community use of data: the  Homelessness Management Information System (HMIS) Administrator and the Homelessness &  Housing Research Coordinator. The HMIS Administrator works to expand community access to highquality, accurate data on housing and homelessness by improving processes and procedures for  collection, analysis, and implementation of best practices; the administrator supports Community  Support Services’ priority to end homelessness by ensuring that high-quality data are available to  county and partner agencies. The Homelessness & Housing Research Coordinator is responsible  for connecting community stakeholders with research and data to inform programming, policy,  and funding decisions related to housing instability and homelessness. Collectively, the two new  positions represent an investment by Community Support Services in Charlotte-Mecklenburg’s  commitment to collecting high-quality, useful, and timely data. The investment has led to important  disaggregation across multiple intersectional categories, describing disparate impact of housing  instability on Black residents—specifically Black women with children—therefore informing more  equitable resource allocation.14 The investment has also increased the capacity of community  organizations to use data to inform funding, program, and policy decisions.  Allegheny County, PA, Department of Human Services   by Shauna Lucadama & Jessica Ruffin In 2009, after being approached by community members, Pennsylvania’s Allegheny County  Department of Human Services (DHS) began a department-wide effort to look at ways to provide  culturally responsive, affirming services to the LGBTQ communities involved with DHS. At the time,  gender and sexuality were not openly discussed in regard to DHS practices. In 2013, through a  partnership with The Center for the Study of Social Policy, DHS began the work of piloting guidelines  for collecting data related to sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression (SOGIE) for   children and youth involved with the child welfare system. The steering committee created to lead   this effort ultimately recommended updating the department’s case management system to include  SOGIE data, implement standards of practice related to SOGIE, and provide training and support to  case workers implementing these new practices.  Before collecting new data, DHS had to address privacy and data security concerns surrounding  youth SOGIE data, the implications of data being shared with external stakeholders, and the  complexities and costs of updating an IT system. Additionally, DHS engaged with IT staff to ensure  they knew the importance of these inclusive changes in order to mitigate any harm during the design  process. A field test of the guidelines showed the broader child welfare community the importance  of SOGIE data in improving services to the LGBTQ communities. Now, these guidelines are standard  practices in providing services to families.  14   See  https://mecklenburghousingdata.org/
21 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Access Data access generally refers to practices regarding who can securely obtain, view, or use data;   when it can be used; and for what purpose. We recommend that agencies and community-based  organizations use a multi-tiered approach to data access that first begins with a clear delineation   of practical and legal data availability.  OPEN DATA RESTRICTED DATA UNAV AILABLE DATA Data that can be shared  openly, either at the   aggregate or individual level,  based on state and federal  law. These data often exist in  open data portals.Data that can be shared, but  only under specific   circumstances with   appropriate safeguards   in place.Data that cannot or should  not be shared, either  because of state or federal  law, lack of digital format  (paper copies only), or data  quality or other concerns. The determination of which data are open, restricted, or unavailable can have significant implications for  equity. For example, the intended or unintended consequences of a data release may disproportionately  impact some individuals or communities more than others. Alternatively, the impact of not releasing data  that are needed to understand or address a community-based problem may also be disproportionately felt.  Open datasets  are most often available online, through search queries, static PDFs, CSV files, and  front-end data visualization tools (such as dashboards). Whether open data supports or undermines  racial equity is dependent upon the source, purpose, presentation, and context of the open data.  Do the following examples of open data center racial equity? u Salaries of public employees, searchable by name   u “Teacher Effectiveness” scores, by teacher and school   u Housing market indicators u County-based health disparities u Traffic stops by race u  211 calls   u Voting records u Daily “inmates” i n custody15 u Arrest records 15   Across all populations, person-centered language is best practice, including using the term “person who is incarcerated”  rather than “inmate.” In this context we are linking to a data source titled in this way. See Underground Scholars Initiative . 
22 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEWhile each of these open data examples is permissible by law, there are a range of perspectives  on whether and how these data should be made available for public use. To center racial equity, it  is important that any release of open data be carefully considered from a range of perspectives— including agencies, individuals, and communities—and that data be interrogated within the racial,  historical, and sociocultural context. For example, in the list above, traffic stops by race could be a  data-informed tool used to push for change in policing, while these same data could also be used  as justification for increased surveillance, as exposure to extreme disparities can cause people to  become more, not less, supportive of the very policies that create those disparities.16   Whereas open source data can be freely accessed, used, and shared by anyone, restricted data are  protected from public access by federal and state privacy laws, regulations, and statutes.  Restricted data: If you are a caseworker, then having access to individual records is an important  aspect of your role. Alternatively, if you are a stakeholder external to the agency, having access to  such restricted data in an identifiable format is typically not needed. If a need exists, formidable  challenges arise as a result of the logistical mechanisms needed for secure access. In this instance,  access is dependent upon a range of factors:  Why  you want to access the information (e.g., research, evaluation, or another purpose)  What  type of information you want to access (e.g., aggregate information or identified  records)  Who  you are (e.g., agency analyst, independent evaluator, or concerned citizen)  How  you will share the information (e.g., anonymized findings via dashboard, aggregate  reporting in a static document, publicly released names) Unavailable data  cannot or should not be shared for a variety of reasons. For some, such as HIV  status or drug treatment, access by external users is prohibited by law. Other sources may be  unavailable because they are not yet digitized (e.g., eviction records) or have substantial data quality  issues. There are also data that are deemed too risky for any form of release in case of redisclosure,  such as information on domestic violence.     Categorizing data as open, restricted, and unavailable is a large task but one that is important for  centering racial equity. Both restricting and opening access to data can lead to equity concerns, and  risks and benefits should be carefully considered. 16   Hetey, R., & Eberhardt, J. (2018)  
23 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Access:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE OPEN DATA Open data that have been identified as  valuable through engagement with individuals  represented within the dataOngoing open data that is based upon problematic  indexes or algorithms, with a history of discriminato ry impact on communities (e.g., release of “teacher  effectiveness scores” and “school report cards”) Clear data release schedules and information on  where to go and how to access data once they  are releasedReleasing data that can be re-identified (e.g., data  released by small geographies may be identifiable  by local residents)  Clear processes for submitting a request to  agency for making data open, including how  requests will be evaluated RESTRICTED DATA Adhering to data management best practices  for data access, e.g., secure transfer of data  (encryption in transit and at rest); clear data  destruction parameters, if applicable, following useAssuming that data management best practices  are being followed without explicit protocols and  oversight in place  Utmost care given to de-identification and  anonymization of data prior to releaseReleasing data that can be re-identified (e.g., data  that have not been properly anonymized or include  aggregate or subgroup data without suppressing  small cell sizes) Accessible data request process with clear  policies and procedures for submitting a  request and how requests are evaluatedUnwillingness to release data, or limiting access to  researchers or individuals with an “in” Creating, using, and sharing high-quality  metadata to inform requestors about what data  are availablePutting the onus solely on requesters to know  which data can be requested Free or low cost for data request, with costs  clearly communicated (e.g., based on hourly rate  or a flat fee)Significant or inconsistent costs associated with  requests for data access Supporting directory-level data sharing among  agencies for referral coordination and to lessen  administrative burden on clients UNAV AILABLE DATA Clear documentation of why data are  unavailable (e.g., specific statute, legislation,  data quality explanation, data are not digitized,  undue burden in data preparation)Refusal to release data when release is permissible  and would not pose an undue burden Organizations are unable to access their own data  as a result of third-party contractors owning or  controlling the data
24 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Access:   WORK IN ACTION Examples of Work in Action for data access fit into one or more of these categories: 1. Transparency of process 2. Track record of providing access to a diverse range of stakeholders 3. Preservation of privacy KYSTATS  by AISP with contributions from Jessica Cunningham The Kentucky Center for Statistics (KYSTATS) is a state government–backed organization that  collects and links education and workforce data for use by policy makers, practitioners, and the  public. The KYSTATS website provides a public outlet for transparency on data collection, access,  and use. The website hosts easily accessible information on all data that are collected, stored,  and maintained. The KYSTATS “Data Access and Use Policy”  provides context for how agencies,  residents, and providers access data based on their user type. Published flow charts clearly  articulate the data request process and response timeline. KYSTATS uses a cost-recovery model  allowing service providers affordable access to the data that they need. Additionally, the KYSTATS  data use dictionary  aims to close the gap between data professionals and the public by providing  context around what data are and are not available for use. KYSTATS also demonstrates a deep  commitment to data privacy, with clear anonymization protocols that align with industry best  practices to avoid redisclosure. This dual commitment to both privacy and access is important for  supporting equitable data use and mitigating harm for individuals represented within the data.  Allegheny County Department of Human Services Client Experience Analytics  Unit  by AISP with contributions from Samantha Loaney, Brian Bell, Julia Reuben,  Shannon Flynn, & Jamaal Davis  Allegheny County’s Department of Human Services (DHS) in Pennsylvania is improving community  access to data through the creation of a client portal. The portal hosts school district, housing,  income support, child welfare, and other individual-level data housed in the county’s data  warehouse. The portal will allow DHS clients to access their personal data, coordinate their own  care, and provide feedback on the quality of support they receive from public programs. Additionally,  network providers will be able to access integrated client data, enabling them to provide more  holistic care. The new system is being developed from community conversations, interviews,  and a prototyping process with DHS program participants. Allegheny County DHS believes in  community members’ right to their own information. The client portal will allow residents to review  their individual records generated through the receipt of county and community-based services.  The community-centered design process supports equity in data access to ensure that the portal  reflects community needs and benefits both clients and service providers.  Birth through Eight Strategy for Tulsa (BEST) / Asemio Privacy-preserving Record  Linkage Pilot  by Jessica England & Dan Sterba In 2019, eight organizations entered into a formal data collaborative in Tulsa, Oklahoma, aiming to  identify and address community-level challenges regarding race, equity, and service overlap. The  collaborative, known as the Birth through Eight Strategy for Tulsa (BEST), includes 12 years of data  from county government, local government, nonprofit, private sector, and philanthropic organizations  that represent 32 programs and 220,000 unique individuals. BEST piloted a new platform developed 
25 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEby Asemio17 utilizing privacy-preserving record linkage that supports data integration while keeping  individual and organizational data private and secure. The platform’s use of cryptographic and record  linkage technology for community analytics allows researchers to integrate data more quickly, at lower  cost, while enhancing privacy for individuals and organizations. The process, driven by agency leaders  incentivized by access to more robust information and improved service delivery, produced results in  less than two months while improving ethical and security protections.  Racial Equity in Algorithms/Statistical Tools  Automated decision-making algorithms are commonplace in private industry and are becoming  increasingly common across the public sector as well. Algorithms, or “series of instructions written  and maintained by programmers that adjust on the basis of human behavior,”18 are housed in  statistical tool packages (e.g., SQL, R, SAS) and incorporate statistical tests and logic in order to  automate decision making. There is no such thing as a race-neutral algorithm, since algorithms reflect the biases of those who  create them and the data used in their processes. That said, there are strategies and tools that can  and should be used to ensure transparency, assess algorithmic bias, and determine the potential  positive and negative consequences of applying an algorithm in practice.    The five guidelines (summarized below) from Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine  Learning19 can be used as a starting place to inform the development and use of algorithmic tools in  ways that are accountable to the public.  1.  Responsibility:  Create clear channels for communication about potential adverse impacts of  algorithms and name specific individuals tasked with addressing these impacts 2.  Explainability:  Ensure that algorithmic decisions and the data driving decisions can be  explained to end-users and stakeholders in nontechnical terms 3.  Accuracy:  Identify, log, and explain sources of error and uncertainty so that intended and  unintended consequences can be anticipated and planned for 4.  Auditability: Enable third parties to monitor and evaluate algorithmic decisions 5. Fairness:  Ensure that algorithmic decisions do not create discriminatory or unjust impacts In order to formalize a commitment to the public and to these principles, it is recommended that  those developing and using algorithms draft a Social Impact Statement  that describes how these  five principles (or others relevant to the local context) will be operationalized in practice. For  example, efforts committed to centering racial equity should, at a minimum, involve a variety of  stakeholder groups in the continuous evaluation of the differential impacts, risks, and benefits of  the algorithm’s use. A number of tools and frameworks may be helpful in this process, including  Algorithmic Fairness: A Code-based Primer for Public-sector Data Scientists ,20 the Ethics &  Algorithms Toolkit ,21 the D ata Nutrition Project  prototype  and white paper,22 and Model Cards.23 17   See asemio.com 18   Benjamin, R. (2019) 19   Diakopoulos, N., et al. (2017) 20  Steif, K. & Goldstein, S. (2019) 21   Anderson, D., et al. (2018) 22  Holland, S., et al. (2018) 23  Mitchell, M., et al. (2019)
26 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Algorithms and Statistical Tools:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE Involving diverse stakeholders, including  specific community advisory boards, in early  conversations about the purpose of an algorithm  prior to development and implementationDeveloping and implementing algorithms  for human services without stakeholder  involvement or alignment across multiple  agencies Determining responsibility for oversight of  algorithm development and implementation,  with clear communication channels for inputInadequate opportunities for community  feedback regarding algorithm development and  implementation Mandatory impact assessments that involve  thoroughly thinking through potential intended  and unintended consequencesFailure to think through intended and  unintended outcomes Clearly identifying and communicating potential  benefits and risks to stakeholdersImplementing an algorithm with no clear benefit  to individuals included in the data Human-led algorithm use (i.e., human can  override algorithm at any point in process)Elevating algorithmic decision making over  judgment of seasoned practitioners; no human  involvement Transparency regarding what data drive the  algorithm and how, e.g., description of design  and testing process, list of factors that the  tool uses, thresholds used, outcome data used  to develop and validate the tool, definitions  of what an instrument forecasts and for what  time periodUse of a “black box” or proprietary algorithm that  does not allow for transparency or replication Efforts to improve the quality of data included  within the algorithm, including efforts to balance  the use of risk and protective factorsUse of data with data integrity issues or “dirty”  data that reflect bias in data collection (resulting  in garbage in/garbage out) Using “early warning” indicators to provide  meaningful services and supports to clientsUsing “early warning” indicators for increased  surveillance, punitive action, monitoring, or  “threat” amplification via a risk score Using multiple measures of validity and fairness.  e.g., testing of metrics that center racial equity  such as false positives/negatives across race  and genderUse of biometric data (specifically facial  recognition)
27 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Algorithms   and Statistical Tools:   WORK IN ACTION  Allegheny County Child Welfare  Office  by AISP with contributions from Katy Collins Allegheny County, Pennsylvania’s Family Screening Tool (AFST) is a predictive analytic algorithm  for child welfare that has received a great deal of study24 and national press, including influential  critiques.25 While we remain concerned about the use of algorithms based upon underlying data  that are rich with systemic bias and a history of discriminatory impact, we acknowledge Allegheny  County’s notable efforts in following best practices of algorithm development, including the five  principles summarized above: responsibility, explainability, accuracy, auditability, and fairness.  The algorithm is powered by the county’s long-established integrated data system ,26 which provides  child welfare caseworkers with a risk assessment score during the maltreatment hotline screening  process. The risk assessment score, calculated based on data points from eight county databases,  provides caseworkers with a tool to engage in data-informed decision making, while prioritizing  human judgment during the process. In building the algorithm, Allegheny County provided space  for legal experts, academics, community activists, and former foster youth to provide feedback and  input into the system’s construction and use. Additionally, the county commissioned an independent  ethical review and process and impact evaluations before implementing the AFST. Since the  algorithm’s inception, the county has seen a reduction in observed racial disparity among cases  screened for further investigation. Importantly, families with low-risk cases are less frequently  subjected to intrusive investigations, while high-risk cases are being investigated at higher rates.  Automating.NYC  by AISP with contributions from Deepra Yusuf, Elyse Voegeli,  Akina Younge, & Jon Truong New York City convened the Automated Decision Systems Task Force to assess the use and  proliferation of automated decision systems (ADS) across social and city services in May 2018. The  task force, which was mandated under Local Law 49, required participants develop a series of  recommendations on the use of ADS and would include community outreach and input as part of this  process. In January 2019, four graduate students—Akina Younge, Deepra Yusuf, Elyse Voegeli, and  Jon Truong—constructed the website Automating.NYC  to help make conversations about ADS more  accessible to community members before the first public engagement forum hosted by the Task  Force in late April. It aimed to support community members in asking informed questions about how  automated decisions can and do contribute to unjust systems, and with the hope that future systems  are built to benefit them. Members of the group were all previously involved in efforts to promote  algorithmic justice and had been accumulating knowledge on NYC-specific ADSs since fall of 2018.  To build the website, they used information from investigative reporting, research, and open data,  and worked with New York agencies to develop case studies. Accessible language and formatting,  as well as a series of examples across different social services systems, allows for a broad audience  with varying experience or awareness of ADSs. Nontechnical topics are used to describe technical  terms and concepts, such as buying avocados to explain a decision tree algorithmic (adapted from  Cathy O’Neil’s book Weapons of Math Destruction ), with engaging and interactive activities. Individual  stories always accompany technical explanations, thereby merging theoretical explanation  of automated decision making with its application and the felt impact on the local population.  24   Kingsley, C. (2017) 25   Eubanks, V. (2018) 26   See AISP, Network Sites, Allegheny County, PA
28 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEMost notably, the “toy algorithm” built using data from the NYC Open Data Portal offers users the  opportunity “to help an imaginary fire department predict which buildings are at high risk for fire”  using a series of variables; it demonstrates how algorithms, though driven by data points, are always  influenced by the human decision making about what goes into them. Finally, the site concludes with  action steps for users to take and apply after they close the browser window. Racial Equity in Data Analysis Data analysis is the stage at which available data are explored in order to develop findings,  interpretations, and conclusions. Data analysis can be as simple as calculating descriptive statistics,  such as counts of program participants or the percentage of participants who achieved a certain  outcome. Analysis can also include creating complex models that predict participant behavior or  outcomes based on certain inputs, and these considerations are broadly discussed in the previous  section. Incorporating a racial equity lens during data analysis includes incorporating individual, community,  political, and historical contexts of race to inform analysis, conclusions, and recommendations.  Solely relying on statistical outputs will not necessarily lead to insights without careful consideration  during the analytic process, such as ensuring data quality is sufficient and determining appropriate  statistical power. Disaggregation of data is also a series of tradeoffs. Without disaggregating data by  subgroup, analysis can unintentionally gloss over inequity and lead to invisible experiences. On the  other hand, when analysts create a subgroup, they may be shifting the focus of analysis to a specific  population that is likely already over-surveilled. Given the complex series of decisions inherently involved in the process of centering equity  within data analysis, collaborative and iterative work with strong participation from a variety of  stakeholders is critical.
29 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Analysis:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE Using participatory research to bring multiple  perspectives to the interpretation of the dataDescribing outcomes without examining  larger systems, policies, and social conditions  that contribute to disparities in outcomes  (e.g., poverty, housing segregation, access to  education) Engaging domain experts (e.g., agency staff,  caseworkers) and methods experts (e.g., data  scientists, statisticians) to ensure that the  data model used is appropriate to examine the  research questions in local contextApplying a “one size fits all” approach to analysis  (i.e., what works in one place may not be  appropriate elsewhere) Correlating place to outcomes (e.g., overlaying  redlining data to outcomes)Leaving out the role of historical policies in the  interpretation of findings Using appropriate comparison groups to  contextualize findingsMaking default comparisons to White outcomes  (e.g., assuming White outcomes are normative) Employing mixed methods approaches  when developing the analytic plan, including  purposefully seeking out qualitative data  (interviews, focus groups, narrative, longform surveys) in conjunction with quantitative  administrative data to better understand the  lived experience of clientsUsing one-dimensional data to propel an agenda  (e.g., use of student test scores in isolation from  contextual factors such as teacher turnover,  school-level demographics) Disaggregating data and analyzing  intersectional experiences (e.g., looking at race  by gender)Disregarding the individual or community context  in the method of analysis and interpretation of  results Empowering professionals and community  members to use data to improve their work and  their communitiesAnalyzing data with no intent to drive action or  change that benefits those being served
30 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Data Analysis:   WORK IN ACTION   #ChangeFocusNYC  by Sarah Zeller-Berkman In 2016, the Administration of Children’s Services (ACS) in New York City partnered with the  Department of Education to examine a series of indicators common to both departments’  datasets. The project brought together agency leads, community activists, and academics to  form a community engagement committee tasked with ensuring that nonagency voices helped  shape the analysis. The committee held meetings with individuals working in schools, communitybased organizations, and health clinics to identify indicators related to education and child abuse,  prevention, and detention that would be analyzed by researchers. Fifteen youth were chosen to  partner with academics at the Youth Studies Program at the CUNY School of Professional Studies to  design and implement a participatory action research project formally titled #ChangeFocusNYC. #ChangeFocusNYC set out to answer two main questions:    What are the experiences of NYC youth ages 14–21 who have dealt with multiple city agencies  in their lives?    What are policy and/or programmatic recommendations that could benefit youth ages 14–21  who are dealing with multiple agencies in their lives?  Youth investigators were involved in all phases of the research project and were essential  contributors during development of the analytic plan. Collaboratively generated answers to  the research questions will help ACS work toward creating a system in which young people are  continuously engaged in shaping the institutions that impact their lives.  Racial Equity in Reporting and Dissemination Reporting and dissemination is the final stage in the data life cycle, where findings from the data  are communicated internally or externally. This involves strategic consideration of the audience and  the mode of dissemination that most effectively conveys the information. While a static PDF report  (like this one) currently remains the most common way to share findings, there are countless ways to  communicate information, as demonstrated by the Work in Action sections featured throughout this  toolkit. These include briefs, interactive documents, websites, dashboards, social media content,  data walks, posters, briefs, and infographics. Regardless of the form, content geared toward the public should avoid jargon that may be otherwise  appropriate for internal program staff or academic audiences, while also using person-centered  language27 and translating materials into languages most applicable to your community context.  Unsure about your accessibility? Here is a checklist for plain language28 and a plain language  thesaurus .29 You can also check the readability of your text .30  Finer details, such as color palettes  suitable for color blindness or printing in grayscale, are also important when communicating to  larger, external audiences.  27   Hyams, K., et al. (2018)    28   Plain Language Action and Information Network (n.d.) 29   National Center for Health Marketing (2007) 30   Readability Formulas (n.d.)
31 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEReporting on data work can include formal, written documents, infographics and data visualizations,  website materials, press releases or news articles, and even speeches. Across all of these mediums,  centering racial equity means paying attention to which data are highlighted and how they are  framed, as well as the readability and accessibility of the communication method. Racial Equity in Reporting and Dissemination:   Positive & Problematic Practices POSITIVE PRACTICE PROBLEMATIC PRACTICE Creating a range of products to communicate  findings across a wide variety of audiences  via both online and offline methods of  dissemination Creating one output that is inaccessible to  general audiences (e.g., a 100-page static report,  content behind a paywall)  Developing differentiated messaging for  different audiences that considers the  appropriate level of detail and technical jargon,  language, length, format, etc.Using intentionally dense language with low  readability, especially for non-native language  learners Reporting data in an actionable form to improve  the lives of those represented in the data (e.g.,  analyzing food purchase data to identify food  deserts and guide development of grocery  stores)Reporting data that are not actionable or that  are intended to be punitive (e.g., analyzing  food purchase data to remove recipients from  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families  [TANF] or other benefits) Providing public access to aggregate data (e.g.,  dashboards, routine reports)Putting materials solely online, particularly  behind a paywall Acknowledging structural racism or other harms  to communities that are embedded in the dataAttempting to describe individual experiences  with aggregate or “whole population” data  without analyzing disparate impact based on  race, gender, and other intersections of identity Including stories as a complement to  quantitative findings in order to better  contextualize the lived experience represented  by the numbersAllowing the data to “speak for itself” without  context or discussion Providing clear documentation of the data  analysis process along with analytic files, so that  others can reproduce the resultsObscuring the analytic approach used in a way  that limits reproducibility Conducting impact analyses multiple times  during the project (e.g., at the beginning, middle,  and end). Asking the core question: does this  work mitigate, worsen, or ignore existing  disparities?Disregarding how findings will impact individuals  or communities
32 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERacial Equity in Reporting  and Dissemination:   WORK IN ACTION  DataWorks NC by Libby McClure & John Killeen DataWorks NC is a nonprofit, community-data intermediary in Durham, North Carolina. One of  DataWork NC’s main projects is the Neighborhood Compass, a public-facing mapping tool that reports administrative data and other publicly available information. Motivated by community  conversations in Durham around the state of evictions, DataWorks NC created a series of events  titled, Who Owns Durham? These events disseminated information through “gallery walks,” participatory exhibits, and community conversations, enabling tenants and community groups to generate ideas surrounding displacement prevention.  These bidirectional reporting practices have allowed for collaboration with community members and  resulted in the creation of a strategy document, “Quick Takes,” and webpage for use by organizers, tenants, and other community groups addressing housing inequities. Metriarch Data Lookbook and Lady Charts Event by Emma Swepston, Laura Bellis,  & Brandy Hammons In 2018, the Take Control Initiative in Tulsa, Oklahoma, created a statewide women’s health  data collaborative. The data collaborative, known as Metriarch, aims to normalize and broaden conversations around women’s health in Oklahoma through data storytelling, resource curation, and interactive outreach events. Metriarch has taken an innovative approach to analyzing and disseminating data in a way that educates and engages community members, service providers, and policy makers. The Metriarch Lookbook’s narrative approach to data storytelling makes their analysis  understandable and usable for a wide range of statewide collaborators. Metriarch’s Lady Charts data jams provide an opportunity for the community to engage in conversation around data to better understand what they can do to improve community outcomes. The data jams bring together diverse perspectives for meaningful dialogue on what data represents and what/who is still missing from the narrative. Relatedly, Metriarch has created a legislative tool that tracks pending legislation in the Oklahoma state legislature. The tool provides a platform to transform data into advocacy and activism, creating more equitable outcomes for women in Oklahoma.  City of Asheville, Mapping Racial Equity by Christen McNamara & Kimberlee Archie Asheville, North Carolina, has seen major increases in population, tourism, and economic activity over the past decade. These increases have had unintended negative consequences for many low-income residents and residents of color, leading to widespread gentrification and displacement. The City of Asheville Office of Equity & Inclusion recognizes the local government’s role in creating and maintaining disparities experienced by people of color and people living in poverty, and is working toward shifting their operations to redistribute power and improve community conditions. Recently, they partnered with the city’s GIS office to create a story map, “Mapping Equity in Asheville .” Linking  racial demographics over time to location and publishing the results online in a user-friendly format has allowed Asheville residents to better understand the connection between racialized policies and physical location, particularly in regards to redlining practices. The story map provides valuable information to all levels of government and community members to help inform policy and program development and resource allocation. 
33 CENTERING RACIAL EQUITY THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEWhat Next? While data sharing and integration are essential tools for data-informed decision making within  communities, to date, racial equity has been a peripheral consideration, at best. We envision the use  of data integration as a means to confront racism, expose injustice, act on our shared values, and  elevate lived experience to co-create and implement new and innovative equity structures and  narratives. We aim to use collective knowledge and skills to advance government transparency and  accountability in data use, which is critical to building trust, community well-being, and improved  outcomes. We encourage you to use the resources, stories, and activities shared here to shift your awareness  and practice toward actualizing a data infrastructure that centers racial equity. We believe our work  together can support sustained investment in government and community capacity for collaboration  around ethical data use.  We encourage you to share your experiences in doing the important work of centering racial equity  throughout the data life cycle. Contact us at www.aisp.upenn.edu , so we can learn alongside  stakeholders and continue to share best practices and Work in Action. 
34 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE?   Toolkit Activity 1:   Who Should Be at the Table? This activity offers guidance on identifying, assembling, and gathering around a table of diverse  stakeholders for meaningful engagement, and should be the beginning point for data integration work that centers racial equity. Meaningful engagement occurs when stakeholders are able to have true influence over the design and direction of a data integration effort and its use cases. Tokenism and performative inclusion will undercut trust and relationships, particularly among groups historically  underrepresented among and marginalized by dominant decision-making processes. Members of the local community and those most represented in the data must always have seats at the  decision-making table. Diverse stakeholder engagement is essential to informed, ethical planning and a key component to establishing trust and strong relationships throughout the data life cycle. Identifying the table Resource availability will help inform the size, location, and design of your table. Start by assessing your financial and organizational capacity for engagement in order to set realistic goals and expectations for your effort.  The following questions and considerations have been adapted from AISP and Future of Privacy  Forum’s Nothing to Hide: Tools for Talking (and Listening) About Data Privacy for Integrated  Data Systems. 31 Timeline:  How frequently will stakeholders be engaged?  How much education or level-setting will you need to do with stakeholders before each engagement activity?  How much notice or time to mobilize (if any) do potential participants need before each engagement activity? Budget:  How many participants do you anticipate inviting?  Will engagement activities need funding?  What materials or resources need to be gathered or created/published/printed?  Will participants need to be engaged or reimbursed for travel or other expenses?  Will any participants receive compensation? 31   Future of Privacy Forum & AISP (2018)  
35 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE?Capacity for change:   What is the current decision-making environment for your organization? Who has final  authority?   How committed is internal leadership to meaningful/active stakeholder engagement (i.e., will  input have material impact on outcomes)?   What aspects are open to stakeholder influence?   What aspects are non-negotiable? Staff capacity:   Do you or partners have staff . . .  u With meeting facilitation experience? u With participatory engagement experience? u With subject matter expertise in racial equity? u  With communications and public outreach experience? u Who can offer technical and logistical support for engagement activities, including events? u Who are from the local community? u Who hold marginalized identities?   Stakeholder engagement must be inclusive of diversity in race, language, culture, socioeconomic  status, and ability. Keep the following in mind as you plan your engagement activities:   Language and literacy, such as using bilingual facilitators or providing translators.   Food, such as providing halal, kosher, or vegan meals.   Location and transportation, such as meeting near public transit or spaces familiar to  traditionally marginalized or underserved populations.   Time, such as hosting multiple engagements or hosting outside of traditional work hours, or  accommodating prayer times for religious participants.   Childcare, such as providing childcare during in-person meetings.   Incentives, such as providing free food and drinks at meetings, or compensating participants  for their time and knowledge.    Appeal, such as increasing use case relevance and impact on particular community groups.   Accessibility (physical and digital), such as providing ADA-compliant physical and digital  spaces or providing assistive technologies for those who need it.
36 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE?Assembling the table Stakeholder mapping is an opportunity to evaluate what groups, perspectives, and knowledge are  or should be represented at the table. The following three-step process outlines how to identify, assess, and prioritize the people with whom you will engage. Remember, knowledge and expertise do not refer to specific degrees, titles, or accolades. Rather, an equitable approach to engagement acknowledges that expertise comes from a variety of sources—such as education, work experience, lived experiences, community participation, and service participation. This will inform how you think about stakeholder engagement. 1. Identify your stakeholders.  Core stakeholders, whose engagement is central to data infrastructure u Data owners and contributors (directly contributing, or facilitating access) u Funding sources (government, private foundations, other)u  Public agency leadership and key elected officials  Other direct stakeholders, whose engagement can help facilitate (or impede) data sharing  success but who are not in the core group u Data users (researchers, advocacy groups) u Technical experts (legal, data technology, security, research methods, fiscal)u  Members of communities marginalized by inequitable systems u Advocates for vulnerable populations and communities  Other stakeholders, who can broaden interest of data sharing and deepen its constituencies u Business groupsu Good government groupsu  Other citizen and public interest groups Consider these questions throughout the process to ensure no one is overlooked:  Who will be representing the interests of the individual community members whose  administrative data are being used?  Which people or organizations will be affected by the results of your data sharing effort now and in the future?  Which people or organizations are influential on this issue at the local, state, national, or international level?  Who is influential within your particular area, community, or organization?  Who can obstruct a decision if they are not involved (individuals, funders, political leaders, oversight groups, etc.)?  Who has been involved in this issue in the past?  Who has not been involved in past engagements, but should have been?  Are there any barriers to engagement that may be/have been deterring some stakeholders?
37 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE?2. Assess your stakeholders’ interests. Here, it is important to think through why (or why not) and in what ways each group of stakeholders is  likely to advance or impede efforts around data sharing.  Consider the possible range of interests—both positive and negative—of each group, such as:   Interest in improving service delivery, fostering research, or advancing policy goals  History of exclusion or harm by government or agency officials  Making the case for additional resources or identifying opportunities for savings  Strengthening governmental administration, accountability, or efficiency  Potential of being embarrassed about an unequitable or harmful system  Discomfort or lack of experience with topic (civic data use or racial equity)  Potential burdens of cooperation  Inertia and organizational culture  Privacy and security When in doubt, reach out to potential stakeholders if you don’t know or are unsure about their  interests. Conversations of this kind will strengthen both decision making and relationships.  3. Prioritize your stakeholders. Based on the information gleaned in the previous two steps, you will need to finalize the group of stakeholders who will be formally engaged. To do this, it is useful to think along two dimensions, influence and interest, as illustrated below. Powerful stakeholders with strong interests (quadrant A) demand the most attention.  (adapted from Bryson, J. 2004)C. IMPORTANT Keep informed, keep on board,   enlist participation if possible  D. IMPORTANT Keep informedA. CRITICAL Close engagement, negotiate,   enlist supportive allies/champions   to help address concerns of   resistant stakeholders B. IMPORTANT Keep Informed, enlist participation   in coalitions of supportive groupsLIKELY INFLUENCE LIKELY INTERESTHIGH HIGH LOW
38 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE?Other tips for successful stakeholder mapping include:   Finding early allies.  Those who are likely to be advocates for civic data sharing should be  engaged early and encouraged to help address the concerns of other groups that may be  influential but less supportive.   Champions.  When dealing with internal stakeholders, having dedicated champions can be an  effective way to keep civic data sharing visible and relevant across several departments or  organizations.   Transparency.  Determining which stakeholders actually participate in an engagement can  become contentious, and so it is helpful to make the selection criteria as transparent as  possible.   Group size.  Although diversity in stakeholder perspectives is important, an overly large group  may be less effective in reaching consensus or navigating complicated discussion points. The  size of the group engaged should reflect the breadth and sophistication of the participants, the  complexity of the use case and engagement, and the consequence of data sharing activities. Gathering at the table Once it is time to gather at the table, establish expectations and model a commitment to equity  during all interpersonal engagement as well as structured activities and conversation. Providing  guidance and setting that expectation for all participations early on will allow for helpful conflict  resolution and reduce harm in the future.   Here are some tips and further reading for modeling equity at your table:   Be aware of individual identities in the room and how they impact power dynamics. u  Activities like the Invisible Knapsack or Crossing the Line32 may help participants  understand difference, and how identity and role shapes our understanding of the world.   Recognize the difference between intent and impact. Both are important, and individuals have  the ability to cause harm or hurt despite their best intention.    Be prepared to address harm. Provide a plan to the group that defines harm, and outline  processes for repair and restoring justice. Share these plans with the group, ask for feedback,  and be willing to shift these practices over time. Some common practices used to address harm in racial equity-aware spaces include:   Burn/aloe/recovery33   Conflict transformation34   Community reconciliation35   Restorative justice36 (school-specific) 32   Goldback, J. (2019) 33   Lewis, T. et al. (2018) 34   Racial Equity Tools (n.d.), Conflict Transformation   35   Andrus, J. et al. (2001) 36   Davis, F. (2019, April 21)
39 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 1: WHO SHOULD BE AT THE TABLE? Other useful resources for understanding accountability and repairing harm include:  Tools for Addressing Chapter Conflict from Black Lives Matter37   Challenging Neutrality, Examining Privilege and Encouraging Practitioner Self-Reflexivity: A  Social Justice Approach to ADR38 Celebrate community and the effort you are putting toward growth and change. A culture of appreciation is built when an organization takes time to appreciate the work and efforts of all involved and promotes sustainable, meaningful partnership over time. Here are other helpful resources to support this part of the process:  White Supremacy Culture39 is a list of common ways that White Supremacy Culture shows up  in organizational culture.   For more on meeting facilitation, see page 38 of AISP and Future of Privacy Forum’s Nothing to  Hide: Tools for Talking (and Listening) About Data Privacy for Integrated Data Systems.40  For support in addressing implicit bias, racial anxiety, and stereotype threat, see this resource  from King County, Addressing Implicit Bias, Racial Anxiety, and Stereotype Threat Facilitator Guide . 41  For guidance on how to set ground rules,42 see this resource, Guide for Setting Ground Rules,  from the Equity Literacy Institute. 37   Hemphill, P. et al. (2018) 38   Nagai-Rothe, E. (2010)39   Okun, T. (n.d.) 40   Future of Privacy Forum & AISP (2018) 41    King County Office of Equity and Social Justice (2015) 42   Gorski, P. (n.d.)
40 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 2: MAPPING ASSETS AND ENGAGING COMMUNITY   Toolkit Activity 2:   Mapping Assets and   Engaging Community  For Toolkit Activity 2, we assume that your agency/organization/site/collaborative has purposefully  and carefully identified a stakeholder group through completing Toolkit Activity 1 and has established a committed group of individuals that represent important perspectives on racial equity within your site context. These individuals should guide and support community engagement in service of centering racial equity in and across the data life cycle.  There are many tools and approaches for collaboratively generating trust, but a critical first  step is developing shared understanding of the local racial, social, and historical context among stakeholders. To facilitate this process, we recommend using the Community Engagement Framework: An Asset-based Approach , which was developed in 2015 by the Chief Education Office of Oregon (formerly the  Oregon Education Investment Board). The nine-page community engagement framework centers the strengths of the community instead of starting from a needs-based approach. Strengths are then used to forge sustainable relationships between groups and individuals.  Below is an abbreviated version of the steps for following this framework to get your agency started  on mapping assets and engaging community. We highly recommend downloading the full document and working through each step with your stakeholders. 43 Step 1: Review the values and asset dimensions of the community engagement  framework Values:  Integrity: Acting with integrity means always being cognizant of power in exploitation of  Black, Indigenous, people of color.  Transparency: This framework strives to embrace potential conflicts, histories of actions/inaction, power dynamics, and the history of limited resources.  Collaboration: This framework is a shift from seeking feedback on programs to authentic co-construction of ideas and plans based on assets, with the voices of Black, Indigenous, people of color centered.  Equity: This framework encourages equity through an intentional examination of organizational practices in both a historical and sociocultural context.   Self-reflection: This framework is meant to be a living document that will undergo multiple iterations as the work and community change. 43   Oregon Education Investment Board, Equity and Partnerships Subcommittee (2015)
41 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 2: MAPPING ASSETS AND ENGAGING COMMUNITYAsset Dimensions:  Primary assets: the structures and strengths of the agency/organization/site/collaborative  Secondary assets: other strengths and structures that are leveraged regularly   Community assets: existing relationships and connections in the community that might  support goals  Historical and sociocultural assets: the history and sociocultural context of the agency/organization/site/collaborative relevant to the work Step 2: Review the overall mission, vision, values, and goals of your   organization and your data integration effort, using the worksheet below. ORGANIZATIONALMission/vision, values, goals of the organization  overall and in the context of the relationship What values structure the work   of the organization? What are the stated and implied   goals of the organization?How do these values manifest   in this project? What are the goals specific   to this relationship?  V ALUES GOALS MISSION / VISIONWhat is the overall mission/vision   of the organization?Is there a specific mission/vision for   the relationship/project?RELATIONSHIP-SPECIFIC OVERALL
42 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 2: MAPPING ASSETS AND ENGAGING COMMUNITYORGANIZATIONStep 3: Identify the 6 P’s in your community and their Asset Dimensions The 6 P’s:  People: Individuals or groups who form the structures and strengths of the agency/ organization/site/collaborative  Place: The geographic features of the land, physical spaces (offices, meetings spaces, locations, etc.), and climate that are primary assets for the agency/organization/site/collaborative  Public: The residents who stand to benefit   Promises: Allocations of time or other resources and the outcomes to which the organization is accountable   Processes:  Theoretical frameworks and theories of action that guide the work    Programs: Existing programs and projects that structure the work  PROGRAMS  PEOPLE   PLACE PROCESSES  PROMISES  PUBLIC  HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT      HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT         HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT    COMMUNITY ASSETS    COMMUNITY ASSETS   COMMUNITY ASSETS     SECONDARY ASSETS      SECONDARY ASSETS      SECONDARY ASSETS       PRIMARY ASSETS      PRIMARY ASSETS    PRIMARY ASSETS  VISION   V ALUES  GOALS  HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT        HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT        HISTORICAL AND SOCIOCULTURAL CONTEXT       COMMUNITY ASSETS      COMMUNITY ASSETS    COMMUNITY ASSETS    SECONDARY ASSETS    SECONDARY ASSETS   SECONDARY ASSETS   PRIMARY ASSETS      PRIMARY ASSETS     PRIMARY ASSETS
43 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 2: MAPPING ASSETS AND ENGAGING COMMUNITYStep 4: Continue to revisit this framework regularly  PEOPLE SECONDARY COMMUNITY HIST/SOCIO PRIMARYWho are the people  involved with the most direct influence on the project/relationship? Who else in the organization might support the work of  the relationship?  (i.e. research, finance, planning, graphic design, technology, other programs, etc.) Who are some people  in your community you already partner with or whose knowledge and expertise might support the relationship? Where are the people  who started your  organization?  Are they still around? Who traditionally has  been a part of designing  and developing  relationships?PROCESSES PROMISESPUBLIC  PROGRAMS  PEOPLE     PLACE PROCESSES   PROMISES  PUBLIC 
44 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 3: IDENTIFYING ROOT CAUSES THROUGH FACTOR ANALYSIS   Toolkit Activity 3:   Identifying Root Causes  through Factor Analysis This activity requires drawing upon the community stakeholders identified in Activity 1, and follows  the work of identifying the racial, social, and historical context of your site specific to data use in  Activity 2. A common misstep during civic data use involves using data to describe problems without  interrogating causal factors and root causes of the problem at hand. Data does not speak for  itself, and it is important to carefully and collaboratively identify causal factors and root causes  for observed outcomes in administrative data.   causal factors:  conditions that contribute to an outcome. If causal factors are not present, the outcome would be different. root cause:  primary factor that contributes to an outcome.  If the root cause was not present, the outcome would not occur.    When a social problem is observed, we often move quickly to develop solutions. For example, a  community grappling with low third-grade reading scores may rush to implement an intervention  such as academic-based summer programming. Factor analysis aims to uncover instances in which  chosen solutions could be addressing a misunderstood problem and may therefore be ineffective. It  does this by guiding stakeholders in asking why they might be observing the outcomes they do, or in  other words: what is the story behind the data? Factor analysis of systemic issues supports stakeholders in using data and lived experience  to uncover the causal factors behind an issue so that solutions can go deeper.44 For example,  factor analysis could lead a community to address low third-grade reading scores by addressing  the inequitable distribution of resources to support early childhood development in feeder  neighborhoods before investing in downstream interventions.  44   This toolkit activity is based upon work of StriveTogether  and The Annie E. Casey Foundation , including The Annie E.  Casey Foundation (2014)  and  (2018 ).
45 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 3: IDENTIFYING ROOT CAUSES THROUGH FACTOR ANALYSISSteps of Factor Analysis: 1.  Define the current outcomes for a population and relevant subgroups of a population (e.g., race,  ethnicity, gender, race × gender) 2.  Identify causal factors. Collaboratively identify what is contributing to the outcomes.    Gains being made: What is contributing to the bright spot?    No gains: What is happening? Where is the population/subgroup losing ground?  3.  Get to the underlying root causes. Ask “Why?” five times to understand the causal factors and the  problem and solutions for the whole population or subgroup(s).   What is the underlying reason the problem or solution is occurring?   What is helping to shape the underlying reason?  Below are two examples where factor/root cause analysis45 is helpful in explaining trends in  outcomes over time. One explores the positive and negative factors influencing trends in third-grade literacy in a community, while the other explores policies, programs, and historical events impacting national trends in the number of people experiencing homelessness. EXAMPLE 3RD GRADE LITERACY (Figure used with permission, StriveTogether, n.d.). 45   Note that we are not referring to factor analysis as a statistical method in this context. 100.0% 95.0% 90.0% 85.0% 80.0% 75.0% 70.0% 65.0% 60.0% 55.0% SY 09-1066.1%70.3%73.6%75.8%78.0% SY 12-13 All Third Grade StudentsSY 10-11 SY 13-14 SY 11-12 SY 14-15 SY 15-16 Few Social Emotional Learning programs in low-income neighborhoodsHigh teacher turnover rates in most challenged schools Limited transit service impacting attendance Decreasing teacher:student ratios due to SY13 school levy Implemented culturally competent curriculumIncreased # of pre-k slots
46 TOOLKIT ACTIVITY 3: IDENTIFYING ROOT CAUSES THROUGH FACTOR ANALYSISHOMELESSNESS IN THE U.S. FROM 2007–2018: (Figure used with permission, TC Burnett, AISP, 2020).
47 REFERENCES   References Anderson, D., Bonaguru, J., McKinney, M., Nicklin, A., Wiseman, J. (2018). Ethics & Algorithms Toolkit .  Center for Government Excellence, Johns Hopkins University. Andrews, K., Parekh, J., Peckoo, S. (2019). A guide to incorporating a racial and ethnic equity  perspective throughout the research process . Child Trends. The Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2018). Race Equity Crosswalk Tool, Annie E. Casey Foundation . The Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2014). The Race Equity and Inclusion Action Guide .  Andrus, J., K. Downes, M. Umbreit. (2001). Community Reconciliation Through Facilitated Dialogue &  Restorative Justice . Andrus Family Fund Board Exploration Triad, Working Paper. Barocas, S., & Selbst, A. D. (2016). Big data’s disparate impact . Calif. L. Rev. , 104, 671. Benjamin, R. (2019). Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools For the New Jim Code . Wiley. Berkeley Underground Scholars. (2019). Language Guide for Communicating About Those Involved in  the Carceral System . Underground Scholars Initiative.  Chicago Beyond. (2019). Why am I always being researched? A guidebook for community  organizations, researchers, and funders to help us get from insufficient understanding to more  authentic truth . Chicago Beyond Equity Series, Vol. 1. Davis, F. (2019, April 21). How schools are using restorative justice to remedy racial disparities in  discipline . Salon. Excerpted from Davis, F. (2019). The Little Book of Race and Restorative Justice:  Black Lives, Healing, and US Social Transformation . Good Books. Diakopoulos, N., Friedler, S., Arenas, M., Barocas, S., Hay, M., Howe, B., Jagadish, H. V., Unsworth,  K., Sahuguet, A., Venkatasubramanian, S., Wilson, C., Yu, C., & Zevenbergen, B. (2017). Principles for  accountable algorithms and a social impact statement for algorithms. FAT/ML . Eubanks, V. (2018). Automating inequality: How high-tech tools profile, police, and punish the poor . St.  Martin’s Press. Future of Privacy Forum & Actionable Intelligence for Social Policy. (2018). Nothing to Hide: Tools for  Talking (and Listening) About Data Privacy for Integrated Data Systems.   Goldbach, J. (2019). The MSW@USC Diversity Toolkit: A Guide to Discussion Identity Power and  Privilege . University of Southern California, Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work. Good, M. & Lucadamo, S. (2018). Moving a Child Welfare System to be More Affirming of the LGBTQ  Community: Strategies, Challenges, and Lessons Learned, Initiatives from 2009 through 2016 .  Allegheny County Department of Human Services.   Gorski, P. (n.d.). Guide for Setting Ground Rules . Awareness Activities. EdChange.
48 REFERENCESGovernment Alliance on Race & Equity. (2018, May). GARE Communications Guide . Local and Regional  Government Alliance on Race & Equity.  Guobadia, O. (2018). Kimberlé Crenshaw and Lady Phyll talk intersectionality, solidarity, and   self-care . them.  Hawn Nelson, A., Jenkins, D., Zanti, S., Katz, M., Burnett, T., Culhane, D., Barghaus, K., et al. (2020).  Introduction to Data Sharing and Integration. Actionable Intelligence for Social Policy. University of  Pennsylvania. Hayes-Greene, D., & Love, B. P. (2018). The Groundwater approach: Building a practical  understanding of structural racism . Racial Equity Institute. Hemphill, P. et al. (2018). Tools for Addressing Chapter Conflict . Black Lives Matter.  Hetey, R., & Eberhardt, J. (2018). The numbers don’t speak for themselves: Racial Disparities and  the persistence of inequality in the criminal justice system .  Current Directions in Psychological  Science , 27(3), 183–187. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721418763931 Holland, S., Hosny, A., Newman, S., Joseph, J., Chmielinski, K. (2018). The dataset nutrition label: A  framework to drive higher data quality standards.  MIT Media Lab and the Berkman Klein Center. Hyams, K., Prater, N., Rohovit, J., Meyer-Kalos, P.S. (2018). Person-centered language . Clinical Tip  No. 8 (April, 2018): Center for Practice Transformation, University of Minnesota. Katell, M., M. Young, D. Dailey, B. Herman, V. Guetler, A. Tam, C. Binz, D. Raz, P.M. Krafft. (2020).  Toward Situated Interventions for Algorithmic Equity: Lessons from the Field , Association for  Computing Machinery . Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and  Transparency. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3351095.3372874 King County Office of Equity and Social Justice. (2015). Inclusion, Belonging, and Excellence for One  King County: Addressing Implicit Bias, Racial Anxiety, and Stereotype Threat.  Facilitator Guide. Kingsley, C. (2017). First, do no harm: Ethical guidelines for applying predictive tools within human  services . MetroLab Network. Kirkland, D. (2019). No Small Matters: Reimagining the Use of Research Evidence From A Racial  Justice Perspective . William T. Grant Foundation. The Leadership Conference on Civil & Human Rights. (2018). Shared statement of civil rights  concerns for the use of pretrial “risk assessment” instruments.   Lewis, T., Gangadharan, S. P., Saba, M., Petty, T. (2018). Digital defense playbook: Community power  tools for reclaiming data . Detroit: Our Data Bodies. Lief, L. (2020). How Philanthropy Can Help Lead on Data Justice . Stanford Social Innovation Review. Mitchell, M., Wu, S., Zaldivar, A., Barnes, P., Vasserman, L., Hutchinson, B., ... & Gebru, T. (2019,  January). Model cards for model reporting.  In Proceedings of the conference on fairness,  accountability, and transparency (pp. 220-229).
49 REFERENCESNagai-Rothe, E. (2010). Challenging Neutrality, Examining Privilege, and Encouraging Practitioner  Self-Reflexivity: A Social Justice Approach to ADR.  Mediate.  National Center for Health Marketing. (2007). Plain Language Thesaurus for Health Communications . Nelson, J., & Brooks, L. (2015). Racial Equity Toolkit: An opportunity to operationalize equity . Local  and Regional Government Alliance on Race & Equity. Nelson, J., Spokane, L., Ross, L., & Deng, N. (2015). Advancing Racial Equity and Transforming  Government: A Resource Guide to Put Ideas into Action . Local and Regional Government Alliance on  Race & Equity. Okun, T. (n.d.) White Supremacy Culture . changeworkDR.  Plain Language Action and Information Network. (n.d.) Checklist for plain language .  Oregon Education Investment Board, Equity and Partnerships Subcommittee. (2015). Community  Engagement Framework: Equity, Transparency, Collaboration, Integrity, Self-reflection . ProInspire: Equity in the Center. (2019). Awake to Woke to Work: Building a Race Equity Culture . Racial Equity Tools (n.d.). Core concepts: Racism  & Conflict Transformation . Rainie, L., Keeter, S., & Perrin, A. (2019, December 31). Americans’ trust in government, each other,  leaders . Pew Research Center.  Readability Formulas. (n.d). Automatic readability checker . Readabilityformulas.com .  Reisman, D., Schultz, J., Crawford, K., & Whittaker, M. (2018). Algorithmic impact assessments: A  practical framework for public agency accountability . AINow.  Richardson, R. ed. (2019). Confronting Black Boxes: A Shadow Report of the New York City  Automated Decision System Task Force .  AI Now Institute. https:// ainowinstitute.org/adsshadowreport-2019.html Staats, C., Capatosto, K., Tenney, L., & Mamo, S. (2017). State of the science: Implicit bias review 2017  edition . Kirwan Institute, The Ohio State University.  Steif, K. & Goldstein, S. (2019). Algorithmic fairness: A code-based primer for public-sector data  scientists . Urban Spatial. Stevenson, B. (2014). Just mercy: A story of justice and redemption . Spiegel & Grau. United Kingdom Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. (2018). Data Ethics Workbook .  Wilber, S. (2013). Guidelines for Managing Information Related to the Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity and Expression of Children in Child Welfare Systems . Putting Pride Into Practice  Project, Family Builders by Adoption, Oakland, CA.
50 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLE   Appendix I: Work in Action  Throughout the Data Life Cycle The following section includes site-based examples of Work in Action throughout   the data life cycle, expanding upon the briefs included within the main part of   the Toolkit.  Racial Equity in Planning: WORK IN ACTION   Broward Data Collaborative by Sue Gallagher Who:  Broward Data Collaborative, Children’s Services Council of Broward County Where:  Broward County, Florida Organization Type:  Government Agency, Community-Based Organization Domains:  Child welfare, behavioral health, juvenile justice, early learning, school, human services,  prevention programs.  Goal/Impact: Through equitable collective action, diverse research strategies, and the use of  high-quality data, to generate actionable intelligence that improves quality-of-life outcomes and  community conditions. The Broward Data Collaborative (BDC) has worked to provide a seat at the proverbial (and literal) table for  residents whose data is represented in the child-serving integrated data system (IDS). The BDC’s recognition  that their county-level systems produce racially disparate outcomes has guided their work to begin building  nonhierarchical relationships between the community and professionals, inviting system participants to tell  strengths-based stories about themselves and their community and use data to co-create system and policy  improvements. The BDC was created in 2017 with support from AISP through the AISP Learning Community initiative. The  BDC seeks to improve the outcomes of residents in Broward County by integrating child-serving data from  child welfare, behavioral health, juvenile justice, schools, early learning systems, county human services, and  prevention programs. Data uses for the BDC include evaluation, research, and care coordination. The Children’s  Services Council of Broward County, the BDC’s backbone organization, is an independent special taxing district  that funds prevention programs for children and families in Broward County and has led the Broward Children’s  Strategic Plan for 20 years. Currently, the BDC’s partners include senior leadership, researchers, and technology  professionals from the human services agencies providing data to the BDC.  The BDC has rejected a race-neutral or colorblind design for data access and use. Instead, the BDC is  intentionally designing an IDS framework that accounts for the historical and ongoing structural racism in  the community, human services system, and service organizations. Too often, data infrastructures exist  as racialized hierarchies with predominantly White researchers/policy makers and system professionals  yielding power over participants represented in the data who are disproportionately BIPoC. Additionally, there  is typically social and spatial segregation between users of the IDS, the system professionals, and people 
51 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEwhose data are in the system. Without proximity to system participants’ lived experiences, system analysts  and decision makers are at great risk of perpetuating stereotypes and bias through data-informed decision  making that is not relational, holistic, or compassionate.46 For example, individual behaviors or choices look  very different from a deficit-based perspective (e.g., a youth in foster care did not go to college) vs. a strengthsbased and contextual perspective that includes the lived experience of the youth (e.g., a youth did not go to  college because they needed to take care of their younger siblings in order to reunite the family).  Based on the BDC’s two core values, equity and transparency, the BDC is prototyping racial equity structures for  an IDS by employing Community Participatory Action Research (CPAR). The CPAR framework builds the capacity  of system participants to be effectively involved in the governance, research, and evaluation of an IDS in order  to address the racialized hierarchy between professionals and service recipients. One of the BDC’s desired  outcomes is for the people whose data are in the IDS (e.g., youth aging out of the child welfare system, youth in  the juvenile justice system) to be integrally involved in the use, interpretation, and evaluation of their data. The  BDC is working to ensure that these groups have a seat at the decision-making table, with the resources and  capacity-building necessary to fully participate. Recognizing that every child-serving system (e.g., child welfare,  juvenile justice, education) produces racially disparate outcomes, the CPAR work is supported by training  partners on the history and structures of racism (both nationally and locally) to build a common language and  framework for system participants and system professionals. In Broward County, Black children are more likely to be removed from their parents than White or Latino/a  children. Furthermore, the highest removal rates of Black children occur in the historically Black communities  that are concentrated in four zip codes established under the Jim Crow segregation laws of the 1930s. To  address this systemic racism, the BDC’s CPAR work engaged youth and parents who participated in the child  welfare system. With funding from the Florida Institute for Child Welfare, system participants were trained as  CPAR co-researchers alongside system professionals (i.e., staff investigators who determine whether children  will be removed from the home, child welfare services staff, and researchers). They cultivated the leadership,  advocacy, and research skills needed to leverage their expertise, social networks, and passion to improve the  outcomes and processes of the child welfare system. Simultaneously, CPAR allowed system professionals and  researchers to build inspiring relationships, learn from those with lived experience and expertise, and see  the people they serve as more than individual data points. To date, the CPAR initiative continues to use these  strategies to build nonhierarchical relationships, overcome professional/participant segregation, and tell a  strengths-based story that is generating policy and system improvements.  Tacoma Equity Index by Alison Beason Who:  City of Tacoma Where:  Tacoma, Washington Organization Type:  Government Agency Domains:  Livability, Accessibility, Economy, Education, Strategic Plan  Goal/Impact:  To design an Equity Index to support data-driven policy decisions and create a more  equitable and inclusive Tacoma where all people have the opportunity to succeed. In 2017, the City of Tacoma elected Mayor Victoria Woodards to office. The leadership of Mayor Woodards and  her predecessor, Marilyn Strickland, both Black females, has led to strides in celebrating Tacoma’s history of  diversity, while also recognizing Tacoma’s legacy of adversity. This is evident in the development of the City of  Tacoma’s 2025 Strategic Visioning Framework, which provides an overarching direction for the city over the  next decade, with the goal of increasing accessibility, education, economy, and livability. 46    Stevenson, B. (2015) ; Staats, C. et al. (2017)  
52 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEThe strategic plan was created using a collaborative and inclusive approach, including resident surveys. It  centers on themes of equity, opportunity, partnerships, and accountability, and specifically reflects community  members’ desire for racial fairness and social justice across all public programs. Over 71 percent of Tacoma  residents surveyed during the planning process believed that equitable access to facilities, services, and  infrastructure was “essential” or “very important.” With this charge, the City of Tacoma sought to improve  service delivery to make Tacoma a more inclusive and accessible place to live, work, play, and visit for all  races, ethnicities, abilities, and levels of income. Through these efforts, the City of Tacoma’s Equity and  Empowerment Initiative was established, including the Office of Equity and Human Rights. The city partnered  with organizations in the region to examine “health equity”—the opportunity for all residents to reach their full  health potential. The city recognized that income, education, housing, transportation, and other factors can  create opportunities or barriers, and sought to better understand the relationship among these systems.  Building on this work, the city then collaborated with the Ohio State University’s Kirwan Institute for the Study  of Race and Ethnicity to create the Equity Index. The Equity Index, drawing from the concept of opportunity  mapping, is an interactive tool that uses administrative data  to highlight successes and obstacles to mobility in  different areas of Tacoma. The Index includes 20 indicators47 that are strongly correlated to equitable outcomes  and aligned with the Tacoma 2025 Strategic Goals: accessibility, education, economy, and livability. The tool  helps facilitate data-driven decision-making processes that enable leaders to better distribute resources and  plan program funding that minimizes inequities and maximizes opportunities.  Screenshot from Tacoma Equity Map   Each census block group is scored on its access to opportunity, on a range from “Very Low” to “Very High” Equity.  “Very High Equity” indicates locations that have access to better opportunities and where residents are more  likely to succeed. The data indicators for this designation include high-performing schools, a safe environment,  access to adequate transportation, safe neighborhoods, and sustainable employment. In contrast, “Low Equity”  areas exhibit more obstacles and barriers within each of these areas, and communities designated as “Low  Equity” have limited access to institutional or societal investments, which limits their quality of life. Tacoma was mindful of not reinforcing historical stereotypes of low-income communities or communities  of color when constructing the Equity Index. To counteract harmful narratives, the index shifts its use of  47   To view all 20 indicators, see http://cms.cityoftacoma.org/OEHR/EquityIndex/EquityIndexDatadefinitions.pdf
53 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEshading and color. The Index does not use green, which has generally positive associations, to refer to higheropportunity and predominantly White communities. Instead, red is used to visualize areas of high opportunity  and thereby call out a need for increased resources. The use of colors was a simple way to confront the public  mindset that neighborhoods with less opportunity are “bad” and high-opportunity neighborhoods are “good.” As a result, the tool has helped educate and change law makers’ and community groups’ approaches to decision  making. It has also led to the creation of consistent policies and processes while highlighting key components of equitable policy making. Further, it provides accurate data that helps inform the conversation about equity  and disparities. Through implementing this tool, policy makers will become more aware of the importance of  consulting with affected groups and staff, while giving organizations a data-informed tool to apply an equity lens to their day-to-day operations. In this way, the Equity Index supports the actualization of the City of  Tacoma’s Strategic Visioning Framework. Racial Equity in Data Collection:  WORK IN ACTION  Mecklenburg County Community Support Services by  Courtney LaCaria & Mary Ann Priester Who: Mecklenburg County Community Support Services Where: Mecklenburg County, North Carolina Organization Type: Government Agency Domains: Housing, homelessness, social servicesGoal/Impact: To collect high-quality, useful, and timely data and use these data to inform funding,  programs, and policy.  In 2014, Mecklenburg County Community Support Services stepped up to fill a gap in the community by  investing in two positions dedicated to improving housing and homelessness data. The Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) Administrator is primarily responsible for ensuring that the community has highquality, accurate data on housing and homelessness, and the Homelessness & Housing Research Coordinator  position is focused on connecting that data to stakeholders in the community to use it. While responsible for specific areas of work related to housing instability, these positions are collectively  focused on ensuring that Charlotte-Mecklenburg collects high-quality, useful, and timely data, and  that the data  are connected to the community in order to better inform funding, programs, and policy. The HMIS Administrator guides county staff and community partners in expanding participation within HMIS;  improving data collection processes, data quality, and data analysis; and implementing best practices and new  HMIS features. This role supports Mecklenburg County’s priority to end homelessness by ensuring that highquality data and analysis of service strategies are available to the county and its partner agencies. In addition, this work supports the annual $4 million federal HUD funding for homeless services and guides resource  allocation decisions. Essential functions include:  Ensuring data accuracy, data quality, and compliance with HUD reporting measures for Continuum of Care  Building partner agency capacity to collect and utilize data for continuous quality improvement  Ensuring that the HMIS program is maintained and used so that community programs and community  needs can be measured and evaluated
54 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLE Reporting outcomes to project and community partners  Recommending changes to the homeless service system based on outcomes  Serving as point of contact for inquiries and issues from end-users related to HMIS  Providing technical end-user support for software and ensuring quality, accessibility, and functionality of  HMIS for partner agencies The Housing & Homelessness Research Coordinator connects research and data with community stakeholders to inform programming, policy, and funding decisions related to addressing housing instability and homelessness. Essential functions include:  Designing strategies to connect data with community stakeholders for policy-making, funding decisions,  and programmatic change  Disseminating community reports and toolkits to inform decision making and strengthen community performance  Managing a community online hub for local data and research on housing and homelessness: Charlotte-Mecklenburg Housing & Homeless Dashboard (MecklenburgHousingData.org)  Leading presentations and workshops that synthesize and translate data and research into relevant, useful, and actionable steps  Serving as project manager for the Point-in-Time Count, bringing together community volunteers and providers to plan and implement a count of persons experiencing homelessness in Mecklenburg County  on one night in January  Providing analysis, interpretation, and visualization to synthesize and present actionable data and research  Providing technical assistance to agencies to strengthen outcome measurement and program  evaluation systems Together, the HMIS Administrator and the Housing & Homelessness Research Coordinator have improved Charlotte-Mecklenburg’s housing and homelessness data collection practices. The investment has led to  important disaggregation across multiple intersectional categories, describing disparate impact of housing  instability on Black residents—specifically, Black women with children—therefore informing more equitable resource allocation. 48 Moreover, this work has connected community stakeholders to the data and allowed  for increased data-driven decisions around funding, programs, and policy that impact community members  experiencing homelessness.  Allegheny County Department of Human Services Office of Equity & Inclusion by  Shauna Lucadamo, Jessica Ruffin, Ellen Kitzerow, Julia Reuben, & Shannon Flynn Who: Allegheny County Department of Human Services Where: Allegheny County, Pennsylvania Organization Type: Government Agency  Domains: Child welfare; LGBTQ+ children, youth, and familiesGoal/Impact: To support provision of culturally responsive and affirming services to LGBTQ  communities 48   See https://mecklenburghousingdata.org/
55 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEIn 2009, Allegheny County’s Department of Human Services (DHS) began their work to collect sexual orientation,  gender identity, and gender expression (SOGIE) data from families involved with child welfare. The process was  part of a department-wide effort to provide culturally responsive and affirming services and supports to LGBTQ  communities involved with DHS.49 At the time, gender and sexuality were not openly discussed as part of DHS  practice, and the experiences and needs of LGBTQ communities were not well understood. Collecting SOGIE  data was just one of several pieces aimed at changing this.  The effort started by creating a data collection subcommittee, which ultimately recommended that DHS update  case management systems to start collecting SOGIE data and provide training and support to caseworkers on  how to incorporate these changes into practice. The original hope was to update the case management system and begin collecting data in the third year of the work, but it became clear early on that changes would not  come so quickly. DHS had to address several challenges, such as concerns that a youth’s SOGIE information  would be mishandled, the implications of SOGIE data being shared with external stakeholders (e.g., parent and child advocates, out-of-home placement providers), and the complexity and cost associated with updating IT  systems. As DHS engaged with stakeholders to understand their concerns, they realized that aligning systems  with desired practice was more complex than simply changing drop-down values in an IT system.  As part of this process, DHS focused on key questions to address these challenges and guide the development  of SOGIE data collection work: Who is informing the changes being made in the information system?  Who has access to the information system?  Will functionality be built-in to mark information as confidential if necessary?  What guidance is provided to workers?  How do you manage safety risks related to outing the youth?  How will workers be held accountable for the proper use of documented information? In 2013, DHS partnered with the Center for the Study of Social Policy to pilot guidelines for managing information  related to gender and sexuality through an initiative called “ getREAL.”50 This initiative employed a full-time project  manager dedicated to improving practice and building stronger relationships throughout the LGBTQ communities.  This partnership supported DHS in making the necessary IT system changes to collect SOGIE data. Throughout  this process a valuable lesson emerged, one that continues to challenge the DHS team: the importance of working  with the individuals responsible for building and maintaining IT infrastructure so that they understand why inclusive  changes are important and how to appropriately design the fields. The role of IT staff is critical, as IT changes rapidly and program staff may not be constantly engaged in all IT design projects. For changes like this to succeed, it is  essential to go beyond handing staff a list of drop-down field values, and instead help them understand why the  current recommendations are what they are, and how and when to seek additional consultation.   Recognizing that information was a critical piece of effectively improving practice, the county field tested the  Guidelines for Managing Information Related to the Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity and Expression of  Children in Child Welfare Systems.51 The field testing was intended to show the broader child welfare field what  it takes to shift practice toward regularly gathering information related to SOGIE and how using the information appropriately can improve practice and outcomes. Now, years following implementation, collection and use of  these data remain a challenge for the agency and its staff. The key questions remain guideposts for the work, and the information provided by the collected data (or lack thereof) highlights the necessity of those questions  and provides context and support for properly addressing those questions. 49   Good, M. & Lucadamo, S. (2018) 50   Ibid.51    Wilber, S. (2013)
56 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLETechnical challenges involving collection timing and additional challenges around staff’s confidence with  asking questions about SOGIE and recording the information have resulted in low rates of data collection.  Improvements to the data system, increased reporting of missing data to staff and leadership, and interventions  and consultants available on and off-site are among the current efforts to improve our ability to identity and improve the experience of LGBTQ youth involved in child welfare.  Racial Equity in Data Access: WORK IN ACTION   KYSTATS by AISP with contributions from Jessica Cunningham Who: Kentucky Center for Statistics, KYSTATS Where: State of Kentucky Organization Type: Government Agency Domains: Early childhood, K–12 and postsecondary education, employment and training, vocational  rehabilitation, healthcare and educator licensure  Goal/Impact: To collect and link data to evaluate education and workforce efforts in the  Commonwealth so policy makers, practitioners, and the public can make better-informed decisions. The Kentucky Center for Statistics (KYSTATS) was created in 2012 to expand upon the work of the Kentucky P-20 Data Collaborative, including maintaining the Kentucky Longitudinal Data System, a statewide longitudinal  data system that facilitates the integration of workforce data and data from K-12 and postsecondary education  systems. KYSTATS has the authority to collect and link data in order to evaluate education and workforce efforts in the Commonwealth. This includes developing reports and providing statistical data about these efforts  so policy makers, agencies, and the general public can make better-informed decisions about Kentucky’s  education systems and training programs. While collecting and researching this information does not give Kentucky a “crystal ball” vision of the future, it does provide the state with a map connecting past outcomes with  future goals. KYSTATS strives for transparency in their data request process in order to more easily connect users with  the rich datasets they maintain. A clear data access and use policy 52 is posted online, where users can find  information for accessing data based on their user type (i.e., agency staff, the public, or individuals) as well as  an overview of data collected and maintained by KYSTATS. In addition, the organization maintains a detailed  flow chart of steps for filling data requests from internal and external parties, including the review process and timeline. Separate request forms for individual- and aggregate-level data allow users to clearly see the  information required in order to request data and to submit their requests online.  Fees for data requests are based on a cost-recovery model and are therefore within budget for most users.  KYSTATS also maintains a data dictionary on their website, which includes detailed, high-quality metadata  to inform requestors about available data no matter their level of data literacy. Those interested in monthly employment data releases will find a clear and updated press release schedule on the KYSTATS website. This  allows users to know when to expect new data to become available and to view a historical log of Kentucky labor  market data releases. All of this information is posted prominently on the KYSTATS website rather than buried beneath numerous clicks or jargon-filled documents. This type of transparency in process is an important  element of promoting equity, as it helps all types of users understand what data are collected and how and  where they can be accessed, underscoring that these data are not available only to elite researchers or those with special connections to the agency.  52   Kentucky Center for Education and Workforce Statistics (2017)
57 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEMoreover, KYSTATS’ transparency in data access processes extends to how they handle the de-identification  and anonymization of data. Upholding the privacy of individuals represented in the data is foundational to racial  equity, as the improper release of these data has the potential to exploit communities who have endured prior  system-level harm and are not often represented by a seat at the table. Thus, KYSTATS ensures that education and workforce information is collected with the utmost care for security and privacy and follows strict reporting  protocol. Prior to release, data are stripped of all identifiers such as the person’s name, date of birth, social  security number, and the agency or institution identification. Then, the data are given a unique identifier that protects the person’s and institution’s information. Once the data are stripped of identifiers, they are placed in a  de-identified warehouse where analyses, reports, requests, and evaluations are created.  The focus of KYSTATS’ research is on the numbers, not the individuals. Personally Identifiable Information (PII) is  used to initially match people within the system and is then replaced by unique system identifiers. No PII moves  with the data to the De-Identified Reporting System. Rather, reports and analyses are generated from data that no longer contains any PII. The transparency of the process and preservation of privacy distinguishes KYSTATS’  work toward creating equity in data access. Allegheny County Department of Human Services, Office of Analytics,   Technology and Planning by AISP with contributions from Samantha Loaney,  Brian Bell, & Jamaal Davis Location: Allegheny County, Pennsylvania Organization Types Represented: Government Agency Domains Represented: Child welfare, family support, housing/income support, behavioral health,  criminal justice, aging and intellectual disabilities Goal: To provide clients and providers access to the robust data held by the county’s Department of  Human Services, allowing clients to understand what data is collected and providers to give more  holistic care.  Allegheny County’s Client Experience Analytics Unit is developing a new client portal that will allow Department of Human Services (DHS) staff, network providers, and clients to access data housed in the county’s data  warehouse . 53 The client portal will contain data from local school districts, family support programs, housing,  income support programs, child welfare agencies, drug and alcohol treatment, the criminal justice system, mental health providers, and more. Moreover, the new system will provide transparency and greater data access  to clients and providers, increasing the capability for both to coordinate care.  Allegheny County DHS has consulted clients throughout the design process, making use of individual interviews  and client feedback on prototypes. Centering the community and seeking feedback from future portal users is  a priority for the Client Experience Analytics Unit, as it ensures that this new interface reflects the resources most useful to those served.  Allegheny County recognizes community members’ right to their own information and is building a system that  will allow residents to see the information collected about them and greater agency to ensure the information  is correct. The portal will serve as a mechanism for clients to provide feedback on the services they receive—providing a needed check on government programs and services and giving residents an outlet to comment  on the quality of services they receive. The client portal will bring client information into one central database,  allowing clients to play a bigger role in their own care coordination. The client portal is built on transparency, both of process and of information, to allow community members full access to their own data.  53   See AISP, Network Sites, Allegheny County, PA
58 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEBirth through Eight Strategy for Tulsa (BEST) / Asemio Privacy-preserving Record  Linkage Pilot by Jessica England & Dan Sterba Location: Tulsa, Oklahoma Organization Types Represented: Government Agency, Community-Based Organizations, Private  Sector, Philanthropy Domains Represented: Public health, early childhood education, K-12 education, basic needs, youth  services Goal: To apply innovation in data analytics with the aim of decreasing cost, increasing speed, and  improving security and ethical protections for individuals served as well as data contributors. The Birth through Eight Strategy for Tulsa (BEST) / Asemio Privacy-preserving Record Linkage Pilot utilized  a data sharing and analytics platform to address common challenges for data sharing across entities with disparate organizational boundaries and political, legal, and ethical concerns. Specifically, the platform  addresses these concerns by de-identifying personally identifiable information (PII) at the source using NISTapproved cryptographic security standards, and then computing on the resulting encrypted data by utilizing secure multi-party computation. In 2019, social service leaders in the Tulsa community came together to identify and then answer communitylevel questions regarding race, equity, and service overlap. Eight organizations representing 32 programs  contributed data from a 12-year period for this effort. Organization types represented included county/local  government, nonprofit agencies, private sector, and philanthropy. The included data sets are protected by HIPAA, FERPA, 42 CFR Part 2, and other federal, state, and local regulations. Programs serving community  members span public health, early childhood education, K-12, basic needs, and youth services. The combined  dataset included over 220,000 unique individuals and answered five community questions that centered on program sequencing, outcome achievement, and racial and gender equity:  1.  What is the unique number of individuals served (i.e., total population) and the overlap between each pair of data contributors for all time? 2.  What is the unique number of individuals served (i.e., total population) and the overlap between each  pair of data contributors for 2018?   3.  What are the differences in program completion rates for different racial, ethnic, and gender groups  for the total population of individuals served in 2018?   4.  What are the differences in outcome achievement rates for different racial, ethnic, and gender  groups for the total population of individuals served in 2018?   5.  How many individuals previously served by two of the participating early education data  contributors were subsequently served by two of the participating youth and adolescent data  contributors? The privacy-by-design infrastructure and approach enabled the answering of these important community  questions by linking data across contributors without ever sharing PII. The data upload process lasted, on  average, two hours per agency. Pre-processing was performed using a proprietary tool designed to clean,  transform, de-identify, and load data without the need for sharing any PII. This approach to community analytics (i.e., privacy-preserving record linkage) improves the security, ease, and return on investment of collaborative  action and has been successfully deployed in two prior pilots, paving the way for this third project.  The novel ability to complete analysis without sharing PII was possible through the combination of  cryptographic and record-linking technology. Remarkably, the application of a trust-centered process in 
59 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEcombination with the platform’s improved ethical and security protections produced results within two months  of the first stakeholder meeting.  This project demonstrates a new, effective way to collaborate and share data between community partners.  It was driven by agency leaders, with no requirement to participate and the primary incentive being access to  information that could be used for improved service delivery. Funding was provided by a local philanthropic  partner who transferred decision-making power to the data collaborative leadership while still providing access to critical philanthropic support. A social enterprise served as a neutral community convener and provided the  technology platform as well as expertise in the facilitation of trust, governance, and data analytics. This project  demonstrated a new platform and approach that more quickly integrates data, at a lower cost, and in a manner that enhances the privacy and security protection for both the individuals and the organizations who serve them.  Racial Equity in Algorithms /   Use of Statistical Tools: WORK IN ACTION  Allegheny County Child Welfare Algorithm by AISP with contributions from  Katy Collins Location: Allegheny County, Pennsylvania Organization Types Represented: Government Agency Domains Represented: Criminal justice system, behavioral health, public assistance, child welfare,  education Goal: To use predictive analytics to allow caseworkers to engage in data-driven decision making that  creates a more equitable, efficient, and successful child welfare system.  In 2016, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania’s Department of Human Services (DHS), in partnership with researchers  from Auckland University (New Zealand) and the University of Southern California, created the Allegheny Family Screening Tool (AFST) to support the decision-making process of county child welfare hotline screening staff  when assessing child maltreatment allegations. The creation of the AFST was the county’s response to a child  welfare system plagued by racial and economic disproportionality, intrusive investigations, and a string of maltreatment-related deaths. The AFST harnesses a selection of the data stored in the Allegheny County Data  Warehouse, an integrated data system comprising data from more than 20 sources, to provide caseworkers with  a risk assessment score based on a family’s previous contact with public services and systems. This assessment serves as a more objective measure of risk, allowing call screeners to engage in data-driven decision making.  In building the AFST, Allegheny County provided space for legal experts, academics, community activists, and  former foster youth to provide feedback and input into the system’s construction and use. DHS held regular  community meetings allowing legal experts, child welfare advocates, and community members to pose  questions, raise concerns, and participate in the planning process of the county’s new predictive analytics tool. Additionally, Allegheny County commissioned an independent ethical review and process and impact analyses  to better understand and attempt to mitigate the harm associated with using an algorithm to aid child welfare  decision making. DHS keeps the AFST as a county-owned system in order to maintain accountability to the public, and freely shares information about the methodology, algorithm, process, and evaluations. Public data,  reports, and information on the use of the system are published online, allowing advocates, experts, academics,  and the media to continuously comment, analyze, and scrutinize the workings of the system. Beginning in 2020, DHS officials are participating in a University of Pittsburgh–led task force to better understand how algorithms  and predictive analytics are impacting county residents. 
60 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLECommunity advocates have raised concerns over the AFST’s potential for “poverty profiling”—over-surveillance  of families who are more likely to come in contact with public services. Since the algorithm’s inception, the  county has seen a reduction in observed racial disparity among cases screened for further investigation.  Importantly, families with low-risk cases are less frequently subjected to intrusive investigations, while highrisk cases are being investigated at higher rates. This statistic highlights the use of predictive analytics to help  inform, rather than replace, human decision making.  While predictive analytics remains a common yet controversial practice, the development of the Allegheny  Family Screening Tool has included current best practices for this work, including prioritizing community  voices, transparent processes, and accepting critical feedback while being responsive to concerns. Most  importantly, the risk assessment score is just one part of the screening process, with human decision making  prioritized. The preliminary results provide optimism about the DHS’s work toward a more equitable and more  efficient child welfare system in Allegheny County.  Automating.NYC  by AISP with contributions from Deepra Yusuf, Elyse Voegeli,  Akina Younge, & Jon Truong Who: Automating.NYC Where:  New York City Organization Type:  University Domains:  All government agency–held data sources  Goal/Impact: To empower New Yorkers to advocate for automated decision systems that work to undo  unjust systems instead of encoding inequality. New York City convened the Automated Decision Systems Task Force to assess the use and proliferation of  automated decision systems (ADS) across social and city services in May 2018. The Task Force, which was  mandated under Local Law 49, required participants to develop a series of recommendations on the use of ADS  and would include community outreach and input as part of this process. Recognizing that many community  members were receiving competing messages about the use of ADS, four then-students at the Harvard  Kennedy School designed and built Automating.NYC —a publicly accessible website—to help make conversations  about ADS more accessible to community members prior to the first public engagement forum on April 30,  2019. It provides a framework to critique ADSs and breaks down machine learning jargon. The purpose is “to  empower New Yorkers to advocate for ADSs that work to undo unjust systems instead of encoding inequality.”  Automating.NYC is not affiliated with the Task Force and was the subject of Aki Younge, Deepra Yusuf, Elyse  Voegeli, and Jon Truong’s master’s thesis.  In January 2019, Younge, Yusuf, Voegeli, and Truong leveraged their design and data expertise to construct  a website that was accessible, visually appealing, and engaging to support community members in asking  informed questions about automated decision systems, and with the hope that future systems are built to  benefit them. Members of the group were all previously involved in efforts to promote algorithmic justice and  had been accumulating knowledge on NYC-specific ADS since fall of 2018. To build the website, they used  information from investigative reporting, research, and open data as well as working with New York agencies  to develop case studies. The use of clear formatting, nontechnical and accessible language, and a series of  examples across different social services systems allows for a broad audience with varying experience or  awareness of ADS.  To explain algorithms, the site applies the metaphor of purchasing avocados to that of a basic algorithmic decision  tree, adapted from Cathy O’Neil’s book Weapons of Math Destruction —a choice-making activity that is both widely  applicable and topical. A “toy algorithm” built using data from the NYC Open Data Portal then offers users the  opportunity “to help an imaginary fire department predict which buildings are at high risk for fire” using a series 
61 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEof variables; it demonstrates how automated systems, though driven by data points, are always influenced by the  human decision making around what goes into the algorithm. The site further breaks down how the design of an  ADS can contribute to an unjust system based on: impact, bias, explainability, automation, and flexibility. Within each of these sections, the reader learns where to detect potential harm and how it relates to exacerbation and, often, automation of injustice.  Three local examples of the application of ADSs and related outcomes are then provided: NYC Public Library,  Housing Authority, and Department of Education. The comprehensive brief and digestible summaries provide  readers with context on how ADS impact their lives as both individuals and as part of their broader community.  The final “Get Active” section offers concrete steps to build community, advocate to local government, and learn more about these issues. While the creators of Automating NYC have completed their thesis, the site remains  operable and concepts remain applicable to algorithmic decision making as it functions in local governments  across the United States. Racial Equity in Data Analysis:  WORK IN ACTION  #Change FocusNYC by Sarah Zeller Berkman Who: #ChangeFocus NYC, Intergenerational Change Initiative, Administration for Children’s Services, & Youth Studies Programs at the CUNY School of Professional Studies Where: New York City Organization Type: Government Agency, University Domains: Education, child abuse, preventive, detention  Goal/Impact: To better understand the experiences of NYC youth ages 14–21 who have navigated  multiple city agencies, and develop policy or programm atic recommendations to benefit youth ages  14–21 who are cross-agency involved.  In 2016, the Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) in New York City received a grant to work with the  National Council on Crime and Delinquency (NCCD) to engage in a data sharing initiative. ACS partnered with the  NYC Department of Education (DOE) to examine indicators across their shared datasets. In an effort to ensure that an analysis of these indicators felt useful to both participating agencies and to community members  that are impacted by these systems, the Educational Services Division of Youth & Family Justice formed a  community engagement committee. The small group composed of agency leads, academics, and community activists was charged with creating opportunities for people outside ACS and DOE to weigh in and keep the  agencies accountable.  The first gathering brought together about 20 people working in schools, community-based organizations, and  health clinics to talk about the initiative and to articulate which variables might be of interest to look at across  the two agency datasets. Participants also identified data that was of interest but that they did not think was captured in the indicators. This community gathering, in conjunction with meetings that included a broad group  of stakeholders from city agencies, homed in on 40 indicators that NCCD would analyze related to education,  child abuse, prevention, and detention.  Although the people engaged in these initial conversations had experience working with ACS, city agencies,  or affected communities, the community engagement committee felt that those most impacted by the two participating agencies, namely young people, remained unrepresented. One of the co-chairs of the committee, 
62 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLESarah Zeller-Berkman, Director of Youth Studies Programs at the City University of New York (CUNY), who is  a critical participatory action researcher, proposed that sustained engagement with a group of young people  who had been in ACS care (preventive or juvenile justice) or young people who had fallen behind in middle  school could generate data from other young people about the  lived experience of being enmeshed in these  systems. With the support of the community engagement committee and funding from one of its members, the  #ChangeFocusNYC project54 was developed in spring of 2017.  Over 140 people applied to be part of the first cohort of researchers working on the #ChangeFocusNYC project.  The initial 15 youth were chosen for the Intergenerational Change Initiative (ICI) team to reflect a diversity  of experiences, skills, and talents. Most youth team members had either fallen behind in school or had been  involved with ACS through foster care or juvenile justice, while others were simply committed to making positive  change using research. The young people partnered with Youth Studies master’s students and the Director of  Youth Studies Programs from the CUNY School of Professional Studies as well as a doctoral student from the  CUNY Graduate Center to collaboratively design and implement this participatory action research study. Teams of at least two youth facilitators and one adult conducted six focus groups in the Bronx, Manhattan, and  Brooklyn with 68 participants between the ages of 14 and 24 to answer two main questions: 1.  What are the experiences of NYC youth ages 14-21 who have dealt with multiple city agencies in their  lives? 2.  What are policy and/or programmatic recommendations that could benefit youth ages 14–21 who are  dealing with multiple agencies in their lives? Participants were recruited through research team contacts, community-based organizations, partner  contacts, and community outreach, and represented a mix of youth on probation, youth who had fallen behind in  school, and self-selected individuals who were at some point in direct contact with ACS.  The ICI team engaged in a deeply participatory process of iterative thematic coding that surfaced three  categories, 10 themes, and 46 codes. The top six findings mentioned across all six focus groups were: 1. Agencies and programs serving the youth in our study insufficiently met their objectives. 2. Implementation of programs can at times be counterproductive to agency goals. 3. Interactions with agencies led youth in our study to feel unheard, stressed, and put down. 4. Youth would like to improve the professionalism of their service providers. 5. Youth desire personalized support and a sense of connection. 6. Youth want programming that meets their needs. The group leveraged the expertise of research participation to develop recommendations that not only address  the specific issues identified but also create processes that continually engage young people to affect the  institutions that impact their lives. Included in the recommendations is youth involvement in shaping policies,  developing monitoring mechanisms, training staff, and auditing outcomes. See the #ChangeFocusNYC  research brief 55 for specific recommendations for ACS and DOE. While the broader data sharing initiative was delayed for almost two years because of legal considerations, the  ICI team distributed their findings in a variety of ways and with multiple audiences. The team created animated  54   See http://www.intergenerationalchange.org/changefocusnyc.html 55   See http://www.intergenerationalchange.org/our-publications.html
63 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEvideos of the focus group data, a research brief, postcards displaying the findings, and interactive workshops  using scenarios from the data. The community engagement committee reconvened in 2019 and is working with  young people from the #ChangeFocusNYC project to share their findings and weigh in on the types of analysis  ACS should conduct using the city data. Expanding the group that is making decisions about data use to include  young people with lived experiences is an effective way to apply equity checks throughout the research and  analysis process. While this project is ongoing, it illuminates how community-engaged initiatives help to ensure  that those most impacted by systems are part of developing and using data to improve them.  Racial Equity in Reporting and Dissemination:   WORK IN ACTION  DataWorks NC  by Libby McClure & John Killeen Who: DataWorks NC Where: Durham, North Carolina Organization Types:  Government agency, community-based organization Domains:  Housing, education, health, environment, infrastructure, community organizing Goal/Impact:  To serve neighbors and neighborhoods, nonprofits, and local governments by  democratizing data to facilitate an empowered, productive, and equitable community. DataWorks NC is a nonprofit, community-data intermediary in Durham, North Carolina. Their work is aimed  at local neighborhoods, community organizers, and local government, with a priority for empowering people  historically excluded from processes of power. One of DataWorks NC’s main data projects is the Neighborhood  Compass ,56 a public-facing sub-county mapping tool of publicly available information, including administrative  data. Additionally, they work with community groups, providing analysis and data support for their organizing  efforts. Through their efforts, DataWorks NC has come to understand that while data can be a powerful tool for  highlighting community concerns, it can also be used to undermine organizing efforts. Below, DataWorks NC  documents some potential pitfalls in data reporting that re-create racism and antidotal, anti-racist reporting  practices. Each anti-racist practice is accompanied by an example of work that demonstrates its value.  56   See https://compass.durhamnc.gov/en
64 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLERACIST DATA   REPORTING PRACTICEANTI-RACIST DATA   REPORTING PRACTICE Using findings to justify harms or putting the  burden on impacted communities to prove harm Reliance on causal inference and reactionary  policy can force people to prove harm rather  than requiring industries to prove safetyPromote solutions that change systems, not people Facilitate the development of policy by directly  impacted communities Focusing on deficits  A lot of health research shows neighborhood  disease rates without showing any  neighborhood resourcesLead with assets and aspirations Convene collaborative, consensus-building  sessions where people have space to speak what  they care about most Not responding to, being motivated by, or  reporting back to communities Many health research topics that are driven by  funding rather than community concernsPrioritize relationships over numbers  Take the time to understand community  concerns, and only go where we’re invited Motivated by community conversations regarding the state of evictions in Durham, DataWorks NC convened  a series of events centered on changes in ownership of rental properties and eviction trends. At Who Owns  Durham? events, DataWorks NC displayed relevant data in a “gallery walk.” Some pieces were participatory, like  a map of evictions in Durham County on which attendees could mark where they live. Conversations evolved  into strategy sessions where tenants were given a platform to collaboratively generate ideas to prevent displacement. The work culminated in a strategy document 57 that considers ways to reduce harm among  individuals who have been evicted, the root causes of displacement, and the potential avenues for and barriers  to making change. DataWorks NC also wrote a “Quick Takes”58 document—a simple, two-sided piece of paper  with distilled, clarified statements documenting trends and disparities in wages, rent, and corporate ownership. They have distributed it among organizers in Durham who are using it in their work right now.  Participants also frequently referenced an imbalance in awareness of market trends, practices, and laws  between tenants and corporate owners, so DataWorks NC created a webpage59 for tenants and organizers to  begin to address this inequity. The site documents experiences and disparities related to evictions, offers  resources for tenants facing potential eviction, and includes easily used data support for tenant advocacy.  DataWorks NC also hosts regular “research pod” meetings, where data collection becomes organizing. Groups  of residents meet at the DataWorks office to investigate corporate ownership stakeholders and patterns in  Durham. This work is ongoing. 57   See http://bit.ly/anti_displacement 58   See https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TQDz96jww-wisizUinHN1u8JKGBLrRV3hbqCXwvz_A4/edit 59   See https://dataworks-nc.org/evictions/
65 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEMetriarch Data Lookbook and Lady Charts Event by Emma Swepston, Laura Bellis,  & Brandy Hammons Who: The Take Control Initiative  Where: Tulsa, Oklahoma Organization Types: Government agency, community-based organization Domains: Health care access, Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP), economic  factors, adolescent health, education, maternal health, mental health, incarceration, intimate partner  violence Goal/Impact: To normalize and broaden the conversations around women’s health in Oklahoma  through data storytelling, resource curation, and interactive outreach events.  In 2018, the Take Control Initiative60 began searching for partners for a new statewide data collaborative and  convened Metriarch, a data haven for Oklahoma women. Metriarch aims to normalize and broaden the women’s  health conversation in Oklahoma through data storytelling, resource curation, and interactive outreach events.  The data collaborative is a partnership between 30 policy, direct service, community coalition, and nonpro fit  organizations in the state. Using a group-centered leadership approach, Metriarch has been able to center  historically marginalized voices and create conversations around pressing issues related to women’s health.  Before Metriarch, Oklahoma organizations felt restricted by the limited publicly available data (typically  produced annually). Agencies and individuals across the community also reported feeling confused and  overwhelmed by the ways data were being reported. Metriarch approached these challenges head-on and took  an innovative approach to reporting, access, and outreach that makes data usable by all Oklahoma residents  and service providers.  Metriarch sought to expand the use of data as a tool to promote community change. From this vision,  Metriarch released the Lookbook61—a straightforward dissemination of data that uses a narrative framework to  contextualize data in a way that makes it relevant and useful for community members, service organizations,  academics, and policy makers. Additionally, Metriarch connects with the community through innovative  approaches to outreach such as their Lady Charts62 program. In fall of 2019, Lady Charts—a women’s health data  jam—brought together data mavens, advocates, and community leaders to celebrate, educate, and engage  in conversation around women’s health. Lady Charts has brought new partners to the table and furthered  Metriarch’s work by facilitating meaningful dialogue around what data are currently measured, as well as what  stories are being left out of the data. Metriarch has taken steps to ensure that Oklahomans have access to their  data through a series of online web tools, dashboards, references, and a legislative tool. Th e legislative tool63 is  a visualization tool tracking bills through the Oklahoma State House and Senate. The tool allows collaborative  members to come together, look at bills, and highli ght pertinent policy iss ues and  leverage data for advocacy work.  Without proper access, analysis, and dissemination, community stories can be lost in the numbers. Metriarch’s  innovative approach is changing the way data can be shared, analyzed, and used to facilitate meaningful  conversation and societal change. Their work has empowered the community and helped ensure that the data  collected by organizations further the service missions of community collaborators.  60   See https://www.takecontrolinitiative.org/ 61    See https://issuu.com/metriarch/docs/digitallookbookv2__2_ 62   See https://www.eventbrite.com/e/lady-charts-2019-tickets-71130803147# 63   See https://www.metriarchok.org/legislative-tracker/
66 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLECity of Asheville, Mapping Racial Equity by Christen McNamara & Kimberlee Archie Who: Office of Equity & Inclusion, GIS  Where: Asheville, NC Organization Types: Government Agency Domains: Equity and inclusion, training, GIS, spatial data analysis, open data Goal/Impact: To advance racial equity and create more inclusive prosperity, where the well-being for  all improves, by including equity data in GIS to enable the City of Asheville to make better decisions  about planning, affordable housing, and economic and educational growth. In January 2016, the Asheville City Council created a 20-year vision for the city that included the statement,  “cultural diversity and social and economic equity are evident in all that we do.” The Office of Equity & Inclusion  recognizes the different places, opportunities, obstacles, and resource needs that impact people’s ability to  live and thrive. In recent years, Asheville has experienced growth in population, tourism, and economic activity.  As an unintended consequence of this growth, low-income populations and BIPoC have faced new barriers to  opportunity, such as gentrification and displacement.  The City of Asheville (COA) is focusing on eliminating racial inequities by developing policies and practices that  benefit people who have historically been held back and neglected in response to these issues. COA believes  that creating these policies will help everyone thrive. The “why” for this work stems from a value of equity and  inclusion as an organization. The Office of Equity & Inclusion recognizes the local government’s role in creating  and maintaining the disparities experienced by BIPoC and people living in poverty. They also recognize the  city’s responsibility to change how it operates in order to redistribute and share power to change community  conditions. To support this work, the Office of Equity & Inclusion and the city’s GIS team partnered to create a story map:  Mapping Racial Equity in Asheville, NC .64 This project uses agency-held administrative data to visualize historic,  racist policies and the racialized impacts the policies have in Asheville geographically. The Office of Equity &  Inclusion has presented their story map to local community groups and teams and solicited feedback to inform  future agency projects.  Linking equity data to location through GIS software has allowed the Office of Equity and Inclusion to better  understand the connection between racialized policies and physical location. Historically, policies like Home  Owners Loan Corporation (HOLC) red-lining and urban renewal have used location-based restrictions to limit  access to opportunities, such as home ownership, for BIPoC. Mapping equity data has allowed the Office of  Equity and Inclusion to study the generational cycles of racially based economic and social disadvantages  created by location-based policies and help correct their racialized consequences.  Further, equity data is held in the city’s GIS, which makes it accessible to individuals and organizations at all  levels of government and community work. Community members and groups working to advance racial equity  can access these data through the Storymap or City Data Resource to inform their work. Likewise, every  city department can use these data to make decisions about “who” and “where” to implement programming.  For instance, the Parks and Recreation Department can see the neighborhoods with large, racialized gaps  in educational achievement and provide supportive educational programming, such as tutoring, in their  afterschool programs and camps in these areas. The Planning Department can use the Neighborhood Change  Index to apply anti-gentrification and anti-displacement strategies. Public Safety continues to use the Open  Data Portal to build trust with communities where trust is currently lacking. Affordable Housing staff can  use urban renewal data to make decisions about the “where’’ of their initiatives and when the “who” requires  additional access and opportunities.  64   See https://avl.maps.arcgis.com/apps/Cascade/index.html?appid=10d222eb75854cba994b9a0083a40740/
67 APPENDIX I: WORK IN ACTION THROUGHOUT THE DATA LIFE CYCLEAdditionally, these data provide Asheville with important insights on neighborhood needs when planning future  capital projects and investments. Using the framework of the Government Alliance on Race and Equity (GARE)  Racial Equity Toolkit, the COA Equity Core Team developed a Budget Equity Tool for budget enhancements.  When the city’s budget is being reviewed, equity data provide insight into “where” and “who” needs funding in  order to eliminate race-based inequities. Overall, equity data provide metrics to help measure the effectiveness  of new policies, programs, and investments aimed at advancing racial equity in COA.   The Office of Equity & Inclusion considers Mapping Racial Equity to be a living project. As new data become  available and new organizational needs arise, the tool will continue to be updated and improved. The Mapping  Racial Equity in Asheville, NC  project won the Herb Stout Award for Visionary Use of GIS at the North Carolina  GIS Conference in March 2019 and continues to receive recognition throughout North Carolina and across the  United States.
68 APPENDIX II: TERMS   Appendix II: Terms Administrative Data: Data collected during the routine process of administering programs. Administrative Data Reuse: Using administrative data in a way not originally intended, e.g.,   for research. Bias: Interference in outcomes by predetermined ideas, prejudice or influence in a certain direction.  Bias can be both implicit and explicit. Implicit bias refers to the attitudes or stereotypes that affect  our understanding, actions, and decisions in an unconscious manner. All data is inherently biased  due to sampling, collection, interpretation, and dissemination.  See  http://kirwaninstitute.osu.edu/research/understanding-implicit-bias/      Community: A place where people reside and interact, or a larger system that people are a part of  (e.g., youth in foster care). We consider the members of a community to have similar characteristics,  experiences, or interests.   See https://www.childtrends.org/publications/a-guide-to-incorporating-a-racial-and-ethnicequity-perspective-throughout-the-research-process           Community Engagement:  The process of working collaboratively with and through groups of people  to address issues affecting the group’s well-being. Community engagement should include authentic  processes at all stages of a project—particularly the beginning—that partner agencies directly with  community stakeholders. Centering the community in agency work is necessary to achieve longterm and sustainable outcomes. Consent:  Explicit permission regarding the collection, storage, management, and use of personal  information. Individuals can give active (i.e., opt-in) or passive consent (i.e., implicit or opt-out).  Consent must be freely given, specific, informed, and unambiguous. See https://fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/FPF-AISP_Nothing-to-Hide.pdf , pg 21 Data: Information collected to help decision making Data Ethics : Ethical issues that arise from recognizing that the evaluation of data collection,  sharing, and use practices has the potential for adverse impacts. In order to minimize adverse  impacts of data processes, ethical concerns should be addressed at all stages of the data life cycle:   Data stewardship: the collection, maintenance, and sharing of data    Information generation: using data to create products and services, analysis and insights, and  stories or visualizations   Data decision making: bringing together data with practical experience and knowledge to  make informed policy or practice decisions See Open Data Institute, https://theodi.org/article/data-ethics-canvas/ Data Governance: The policies and procedures that determine how data are managed, used,   and protected.
69 APPENDIX II: TERMSData Infrastructure: Approach for using, storing, securing, and interpreting data. Includes physical  elements, such as storage approaches, and intangible elements such as software. Data Privacy: A fundamental right, guaranteed by law, that provides individuals control over the  collection, use, and dissemination of their data. Agencies must put procedures in place that protect  how personal information flows, protect the freedom of thought and exploration; and protect one’s  dignity and reputation.  See https://fpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/FPF-AISP_Nothing-to-Hide.pdf , Appendix A Equity: The elimination of privilege, oppression, disparities, and disadvantage to co-create a just,  fair, and inclusive society in which all can participate, prosper, and reach their full potential. See https://www.policylink.org/about-us/equity-manifesto Racial Equity:  The condition where one’s racial identity no longer influences how one fares in society.  This includes the creation of racially just policies, practices, attitudes, and cultural messages, and the  elimination of structures that reinforce differential experiences and outcomes by race.  See http://racialequitytools.org/glossary#racial-equity Racism Individual Racism: The beliefs, attitudes, and actions of individuals that support or  perpetuate racism in conscious and unconscious ways. See http://racialequitytools.org/fundamentals/core-concepts/racism   Institutional Racism:  The ways in which policies, procedures, and practices of parts of  systems (e.g., schools, courts, transportation authorities) or organizations influence  different outcomes for different racial groups. See http://racialequitytools.org/fundamentals/core-concepts/racism   Structural Racism:  The normalization and legitimization of an array of dynamics— historical, cultural, institutional and interpersonal—that routinely advantage Whites  while producing cumulative and chronic adverse outcomes for people of color. See http://racialequitytools.org/glossary#structural-racism   Social Justice:  The proactive reinforcement of policies, practices, attitudes, and actions that  produce equitable power, access, opportunities, treatment, impacts, and outcomes for all.  See http://racialequitytools.org/glossary#racial-equity    
70 APPENDIX III: EXPANDED CIVIC DATA USER PROFILES   Appendix III: Expanded Civic  Data User Profiles Members of institutions    University-based researcher  who works with government and nonprofit agencies to support  research and evaluation efforts that lead to improved policy and outcomes.    State government agency situated administrator who works across state agencies to better  drive integrated service delivery and outcome improvement through data and policy.    State government/local government agency of technology administrator  who works across  agencies to support data infrastructure and use.   City/county government agency situated administrator  that works across agencies to better  drive integrated service delivery and outcome improvement through data and policy.   Foundation staff  who work to better understand and support investments that lead to quality  research and evaluation, and ultimately improved outcomes for families and communities. Questions to guide members of institutions    Historically, how has our use of data impacted disenfranchised communities we seek   to serve?     What must we do differently to center equity?  Community representatives   Community advocate  who works to build transparency and center equity within governmentled projects.   Community leader/members  who live within, receives, is directly impacted by services and  data collection, including members of over-surveilled communities.    Local backbone organization  (community-based nonprofit, NGO, Children Services Council)  administrator  who works across agencies to better drive integrated service delivery and  outcome improvement through data and policy. Questions to guide community representatives       What do we not have access to that would have made my work more impactful?    How has data been used against me and my work? 
71 APPENDIX III: EXPANDED CIVIC DATA USER PROFILESBridges between community and institutions     Service provider/social worker/case worker  (any agency/entity receiving direct funding from  government to provide services) who works across agencies to drive integrated service and  improved outcomes (homelessness service providers, social workers, etc.).   Applied researcher  who works with government and nonprofit agencies.    Consultant  who works with government and nonprofit partners to improve social outcomes. Questions to guide bridges between community and institutions   How have we been successful in using data to move individual- and population-level  outcomes?   What are the opportunities to address equity?    What are the assumptions we are operating under, particularly as related to data, class,   and race?
72 APPENDIX IV: RESOURCES   Appendix IV: Resources  General Resources Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2014). Race Equity and Inclusion Action Guide . https://www.aecf.org/ resources/race-equity-and-inclusion-action-guide/ Annie E. Casey Foundation. (2018). Race Equity Crosswalk Tool, Annie E. Casey Foundation . https:// www.aecf.org/m/blogdoc/aecf-raceequitycrosswalk-2018.pdf Chicago Beyond. (2019). Why am I Always Being Researched?   https://chicagobeyond.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/ChicagoBeyond_2019Guidebook.pdf   Coalition of Communities of Color. (2014). Tool for Organizational Self-Assessment Related to Racial  Equity . https://www.coalitioncommunitiescolor.org/research-and-publications/cccorgassessment Equity in the Center, ProInspire. (2019). Awake to Woke to Work: Building a Race Equity Culture .  https://www.equityinthecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Equity-in-Center-Awake-WokeWork-2019-final-1.pdf Nelson, J., Spokane, L., Ross, L., & Deng, N. (2015). Advancing Racial Equity and Transforming  Government: A Resource Guide to Put Ideas into Action . Local and Regional Government Alliance  on Race & Equity. https://racialequityalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/GARE-Resource_ Guide.pdf Nelson, J., & Brooks, L. (2015). Racial Equity Toolkit: An opportunity to operationalize equity . Local  and Regional Government Alliance on Race & Equity. https://www.racialequityalliance.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/10/GARE-Racial_Equity_Toolkit.pdf Lewis, T., Gangadharan, S. P., Saba, M., Petty, T. (2018). Digital defense playbook: Community power  tools for reclaiming data . Detroit: Our Data Bodies.  https://www.odbproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/ODB_DDP_HighRes_Spreads.pdf United Kingdom Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. (2018). Data Ethics Workbook .  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/data-ethics-workbook/data-ethics-workbook Specific to Algorithms Anderson, D., Bonaguru, J., McKinney, M., Nicklin, A., Wiseman, J. (2018). Ethics & Algorithms Toolkit .  Center for Government Excellence, Johns Hopkins University. https://ethicstoolkit.ai/ Diakopoulos, N., Friedler, S., Arenas, M., Barocas, S., Hay, M., Howe, B., Jagadish, H. V., Unsworth,  K., Sahuguet, A., Venkatasubramanian, S., Wilson, C., Yu, C., & Zevenbergen, B. (2017). Principles for  accountable algorithms and a social impact statement for algorithms.  FAT/ML. https://www.fatml. org/resources/principles-for-accountable-algorithms
73 APPENDIX IV: RESOURCESKatell, M., Young, M., Dailey, D., Herman, B., Guetler, V., Tam, A., Binz, C., Raz, D., & Krafft, P.M.  (2020). Toward Situated Interventions for Algorithmic Equity: Lessons from the Field , Association  for Computing Machinery . Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and  Transparency. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3351095.3372874 Kingsley, C. (2017). First, Do No Harm: Ethical Guidelines for Applying Predictive Tools Within Human  Services . MetroLab Network. https://metrolabnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/EthicalGuidelines-for-Applying-Predictive-Tools-within-Human-Services_Sept-2017.pdf Richardson, R. ed. (2019). Confronting Black Boxes: A Shadow Report of the New York City  Automated Decision System Task Force .  AI Now Institute. https://ainowinstitute.org/adsshadowreport-2019.pdf Specific to Foundation Staff Lief, L. (2020). How Philanthropy Can Help Lead on Data Justice , Stanford Social Innovation Review .   https://ssir.org/articles/entry/how_philanthropy_can_help_lead_on_data_justice# Specific to Researchers Andrews, K., Parekh, J., Peckoo, S. (2019). A guide to incorporating a racial and ethnic equity  perspective throughout the research process . Child Trends. https://www.childtrends.org/wpcontent/uploads/2019/09/RacialEthnicEquityPerspective_ChildTrends_October2019.pdf Kirkland, D. (2019). No Small Matters: Reimagining the Use of Research Evidence From A Racial  Justice Perspective . William T. Grant Foundation. http://wtgrantfoundation.org/digest/no-smallmatters-reimagining-the-use-of-research-evidence-from-a-racial-justice-perspective
Actionable Intelligence for Social Policy University of Pennsylvania 3701 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104 215.573.5827     www.aisp.upenn.edu
