	 						BIG	DATA:	NEW	CHALLENGES	FOR	LAW	AND	ETHICS	International	scientific	conference	22	-	23	May	2017		Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	Poljanski	nasip	2,	Ljubljana,	Slovenia						 
	 	 2	Table	of	Contents		About	the	Conference	4	Keynote	speakers	5	Contact	Information	and	Registration	8	Programme	9	Abstracts	15	"But	I	used	quotation	marks"	-	data	science	methods	and	misinterpretations	15	Tjerk	Timan	15	(Anti)Discrimination	and	Big	Data	Consumer	Credit	Risk	Analysis	15	Gavin	Robinson	15	Algorithmic	Patrol:	The	Futures	of	Predictive	Policing	16	Dean	Wilson	16	Algorithmic	prediction	in	crime	control	16	Aleš	Završnik	16	Anonymisation	of	judicial	decisions	with	machine	learning	17	Matej	Kovačič,	Aljaž	Košmerlj	17	Automated	Cybercrime	Investigations:	The	example	of	“Sweetie	2.0”	17	Gregor	Urbas	17	Big	Data	–	Big	Ignorance	18	Renata	Salecl	18	Big	Data	and	Economic	Cyber	Espionage:	an	International	Law	Perspective	18	Maruša	T.	Veber	18	Big	Data	in	Criminal	Justice	–	Few	Chances	and	Serious	Risks	18	Uwe	Ewald	18	Big	Data,	Data	Protection	and	Citizen	Empowerment:	The	Revival	of	Individual	Participation	Principle	as	a	Response	to	New	Technological	Challenges	19	Wenlong	Li	19	Big	Data,	Psychodiagnostics	and	Threats	to	Personal	Autonomy	19	Friderik	Klampfer,	Bojan	Musil,	Nenad	Čuš	Babič	and	Domen	Bajde	19	Big	health	data	on	social	networking	platforms:	The	legal	and	ethical	questions	20	Maria	Tzanou	20	Cross-border	exchange	of	big	data	-	innovative	technology	meets	outdated	legal	framework	21	Stanislaw	Tosza	21	Databases	and	Due	Process	with	regard	to	European	Court	of	Human	Rights’	Case-Law	21	Begüm	Bulak	Uygun	21	Dispensable	humans	and	indispensable	machines	in	the	context	of	class	and	social	control	22	Zoran	Kanduč	22	Economic	Cyber	Espionage	and	Regulation	of	Big	Data	Theft	at	the	International	Level	23	Maša	Kovič	Dine	23	Finding	the	right	balance	between	security	and	privacy:	NATO	and	the	big	data	analyses	23	Mitko	Bogdanoski,	Metodi	Hadji-Janev	23	Five	Reasons	Not	to	Personify	AI	23	Joanna	J.	Bryson	23	Healthcare	Robots	and	the	Right	to	Privacy	24	Tjaša	Zapušek	24	Hiding	large	amounts	of	data	in	virtual	disk	images	24	
	 	 3	Gašper	Fele-Žorž,	Andrej	Brodnik,	24	How	Are	the	Australian	Metadata	Laws	Affecting	the	Average	Social	Media	User?	25	Carolina	Are	25	How	do	public	sector	values	get	into	public	sector	machine	learning	systems,	if	at	all?	25	Michael	Veale	25	Individual	control	over	personal	data	in	the	data-driven	economy	26	Helena	Uršič	26	Judicial	oversight	of	(mass)	collecting	and	processing	of	personal	data	26	Primož	Gorkič	26	Limits	of	the	current	state	of	Artificial	Intelligence	for	Law	26	Marko	Grobelnik	26	Living	labs	and	big	data	in	practice:	Stratumseind	2.0	-	A	discussion	of	a	living	lab	in	the	Netherlands	27	Masa	Galic	27	NATO’s	New	Challenge:	Synchronizing	“Dots”,	“Bullets”	and	“Skills”	27	Mitko	Bogdanoski	and	Metodi	Hadji-Janev	27	Personal	data	for	common	good:	how	to	profit	from	Big	Data	sustainably	28	Nadya	Purtova	28	Personal	Data	Protection	in	Social	Sciences	in	Big	Data	Era	28	Janez	Štebe,	Sonja	Bezjak,	Irena	Bolko	and	Ana	Slavec	28	Pricing	(big)	data:	the	right	to	know	the	value	of	our	own	personal	data	28	Gianclaudio	Malgieri	28	Protecting	Individual	Rights	With	Basic	Tools	in	the	High-Tech	Era	29	Sorina	Ioana	Doroga	29	Reconfiguring	freedom:	Big	data,	the	Investigatory	Powers	Act	2016	and	the	construction	of	liberty	in	the	UK’s	security	state.	29	Lydia	Morgan	29	Slave	to	the	Algo-rhythm?	Legal	and	technological	sticking	points	concerning	machine	learning	and	the	GDPR	30	Lilian	Edwards	and	Michael	Veale	30	Slovenian	criminal	intelligence	activity	and	protection	of	privacy	31	Sabina	Zgaga	31	Social	network,	social	profiling,	predictive	policing.	Current	issues	and	future	perspectives	31	Federico	Costantini	31	State’s	Due	Diligence	in	Cyberspace	in	the	Era	of	Big	Data	31	Vasilka	Sancin	31	The	alluring	promise	of	objectivity:	Big	data	in	criminal	justice	32	Mojca	Plesničar	32	We	don’t	know	what	the	Questions	are,	but	we	know	we're	gonna	find	the	Answers	32	Alexander	Czadilek,	Christof	Tschohl	and	Walter	Hötzendorfer	32	About	the	Venue	34	Map	of	the	Building	of	the	Faculty	of	Law	35	VENUE:	Faculty	of	Law	in	Ljubljana	36	HOST	CITY:	Ljubljana	38	OTHER	IMPORTANT	INFORMATION	39	Notes	40				
	 	 4		About	the	Conference	“Big	Data”	is	a	phrase	that	has	been	used	pervasively	by	the	media	and	the	lay	public	in	the	last	several	years.	Amongst	many	other	fields,	social	control	and	crime	control	in	particular	have	become	one	of	the	key	emerging	use	cases	of	big	data.		For	example,	police	predictive	software	produce	probability	reports	on	criminality	and	assure	us	that	by	using	this,	societies	will	reduce	crime.	Other	programs	are	looking	for	patterns	that	would	help	us	predict	a	terrorist	attack.	Criminal	justice	systems	are	using	technological	solution	too,	for	instance,	to	predict	future	crimes	of	those	applying	for	bail	or	those	to	be	sent	on	a	parole.	Underlying	these	and	many	other	potential	uses	of	big	data	in	crime	control,	however,	are	a	series	of	legal	and	ethical	challenges	relating	to,	among	other	things	to	privacy,	discrimination,	and	presumption	of	innocence.			The	leading	questions	the	conference	speaker	will	tackle	are:	• how	the	operations	of	society,	political	systems,	and,	in	particular,	social	control	and	crime	control,	is	changing	due	to	large	data	bases	and	algorithmic	data	mining	and	predicting	powers?	• Will	computers	decide	who	to	prosecute	and	who	should	be	sent	to	jail?	• Which	programmes	and	systems	of	algorithmic	predictions	are	already	in	place	in	the	criminal	justice	systems	around	the	globe?	• Why	this	can	be	dangerous	in	terms	of	fundamental	human	rights	and	fundamental	principles	of	democratic	societies?	• Is	the	new	GDPR	a	suitable	framework	for	»algocracy«,	i.e.	rule	by	the	algorithm?	• How	can	we	propose	solutions	that	may	not	hinder	the	development	of	the	technology,	but	enable	more	nuanced,	ethically	and	legally	sound	solutions	to	be	developed	in	the	future?		We	invite	paper	proposals	from	scholars	across	the	social	sciences	and	humanities	studying	big	data	challenges	for	law	and	ethics.			Themes	of	interest	include	(tentative	list):	• big	data	and	crime	control	• predictive	policing	• automated	justice	• big	data	and	discrimination	• big	data	and	social	sorting	• ethical	dilemmas	and	predictive	analytics	• big	data	and	international	law	• big	data	and	personal	data	protection	law	• big	data	and	cyber	espionage	• big	data	and	citizen	empowerment	
	 	 5	Keynote	speakers	• Dean	Wilson,	University	of	Sussex,	Brighton,	UK	• Nadya	Purtova,	TILT,	Tilburg	University,	The	Netherlands	• Joanna	J.	Bryson,	University	of	Bath,	UK,	and	affil.	at	The	Center	for	Information	Technology	Policy,	Princeton	University,	USA	• Marko	Grobelnik,	Jozef	Stefan	Institute,	Slovenia	• Tjerk	Timan,	TILT/	University	of	Tilburg	• Alexander	Czadilek,	Christof	Tschohl	and	Walter	Hötzendorfer,	epicenter.works,	Research	Institute	Vienna	• Renata	Salecl,	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law,	Slovenia	• Aleš	Završnik,	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law,	Slovenia	 Dean	Wilson	was	a	lecturer	and	then	senior	lecturer	in	criminology	at	Monash	University,	Melbourne,	Australia	between	2003	and	2010	and	a	Reader	in	Criminology	at	the	University	of	Plymouth	prior	to	joining	the	University	of	Sussex	in	2015,	where	he	is	Professor	of	Criminology	in	the	Department	of	Sociology,	School	of	Law,	Politics	and	Sociology.	Dean’s	key	research	interests	are	in	surveillance	and	policing,	and	he	has	published	widely	in	the	areas	of	histories	of	urban	policing,	contemporary	policing,	surveillance	and	most	recently	pre-emption	and	criminal	justice.	His	most	recent	publication	(with	Jude	McCulloch)	Pre-Crime:	Pre-emption,	precaution	and	the	future	was	published	by	Routledge	in	2016.	Dean	is	also	Co-Director	of	the	international	Surveillance	Studies	Network,	and	an	Associate	Editor	of	the	journal	Surveillance	&	Society.		Nadya	Purtova	is	an	Assistant	Professor	at	Tilburg	Institute	for	Law,	Technology,	and	Society,	Tilburg	University,	where	she	does	research	on	data	protection	and	informational	privacy	law,	property	rights	in	personal	data	and	economic	analysis	of	data	protection	law.	Nadya	obtained	her	PhD	in	law	(cum	laude)	in	2011	from	Tilburg	University.	Her	dissertation	on	property	rights	in	personal	data	(Tilburg	University	Best	Doctoral	Dissertation	Award	for	2010/11)	is	published	by	Kluwer	Law	International.	In	2016	she	was	awarded	the	European	Research	Council	(ERC)	Starting	Grant	to	conduct	a	five-year	research	project	aimed	to	reconfigure	legal	protection	of	people	against	information-induced	harms	based	on	better	understanding	of	information	rooted	in	law,	economics,	and	information	studies	(ERC-2016-StG-716971	INFO-LEG).		Joanna	J.	Bryson	is	a	transdisciplinary	researcher	on	the	structure	and	dynamics	of	human-	and	animal-like	intelligence.	Her	research	covers	topics	ranging	from	artificial	intelligence,	through	autonomy	and	robot	ethics,	and	on	to	human	cooperation.		Bryson's	first	degree	is	in	Behavioural	Science	(non-clinical	psychology)	from	Chicago	(1986),	she	also	holds	an	MSc	in	Artificial	Intelligence	and	an	MPhil	in	Psychology	from	Edinburgh	(1992,	2000)	and	a	PhD	in	Artificial	Intelligence	from	MIT	(2001).		Bryson	joined	Bath	in	2002	in	their	Department	of	Computer	Science,	where	she	was	promoted	to	Reader	(tenured	associate	professor)	in	2010.	She	founded	and	for	several	years	lead	their	Intelligent	Systems	research	group,	and	is	affiliated	with	Bath's	Institutes	for	Policy	Research	and	Mathematical	Innovation,	as	well	as	their	Centres	for	Networks	and	Collective	Behaviour	and	for	Digital	Entertainment.		She	has	held	visiting	academic	positions	with	Princeton's	Center	for	Information	Technology	Policy	(where	she	is	still	affiliated),		the	Mannheim	Centre	for	Social	Science	Research	(MZES,	2011-2014),	the	Department	of	Anthropology	Oxford	(Harvey	Whitehouse's	Explaining	Religion	project,	2010-2011),	The	Methods	&	Data	Institute	at	Nottingham	(agent-based	modelling	in	political	science	2007-2008),	and	the	Konrad	Lorenz	Institute	for	Evolution	&	Cognition	Research	in	Austria	(on	the	biological	origins	of	culture,	2007-	2009).		Before	coming	to	Bath,	she	conducted	academic	research	in	Edinburgh's	Human	Communication	Research	Centre	(1999-2000),	and	Harvard's	Department	of	Psychology	(2001-2002).	Additionally,	she	has	professional	experience	in	Chicago's	financial	industry	(1986-1991),	international	organization	management	consultancy	(1993-1994),	and	industrial	AI	research	(for	LEGO,	1995,	1998).		Bryson	has	served	on	the	Senate,	Council,	and	Court	for	the	University	of	Bath,	representing	the	Academic	Assembly.	She	is	presently	a	member	of	the	College	of	the	British	Engineering	and	Physical	Sciences	Research	Council	(EPSRC)	and	serves	as	a	member	of	the	editorial	board	for	several	academic	journals,	including	Adaptive	Behaviour,	AI	&	Society,	Connection	Science,	and	The	International	Journal	of	Synthetic	Emotions.	
	 	 6	Marko	Grobelnik	is	a	researcher	in	the	field	of	Artificial	Intelligence	(AI).	Focused	areas	of	expertise	are	Machine	Learning,	Data/Text/Web	Mining,	Network	Analysis,	Semantic	Technologies,	Deep	Text	Understanding,	and	Data	Visualization.		Marko	co-leads	Artificial	Intelligence	Lab	at	Jozef	Stefan	Institute	and	is	the	CEO	of	Quintelligence.com	specialized	in	solving	complex	AI	problems	for	the	commercial	world.	He	collaborates	with	major	European	academic	institutions	and	major	industries	such	as	Bloomberg,	British	Telecom,	European	Commission,	Microsoft	Research,	New	York	Times.	Marko	is	co-author	of	several	books,	co-founder	of	several	start-ups	and	is/was	involved	into	over	50	EU	funded	research	projects	on	various	fields	of	Artificial	Intelligence.	In	2016	Marko	became	Digital	Champion	of	Slovenia	at	European	Commission.	Tjerk	Timan	is	a	postdoc	researcher	on	surveillance	and	privacy	in	the	VICI	project	of	prof.	Bert-Jaap	Koops	at	Tilburg	Institute	for	Law,	Technology,	and	Society	/	University	of	Tilburg.	Christof	Tschohl	is	ICT	engineer	and	lawyer	and	serves	since	2012	as	Scientific	Director	of	the	Research	Institute	–	Digital	Human	Rights	Center	in	Vienna.	He	is	primarily	in	charge	of	the	development	of	research	projects	and	publications	on	Human	Rights	and	Information	Technology	and	has	been	employed	many	years	as	a	legal	researcher	for	the	Ludwig	Boltzmann	Institute	of	Human	Rights	and	as	post-doc	Project	Assistant	at	the	University	of	Vienna.	Mr.	Tschohl	is	furthermore	the	chairman	of	epicenter.works,	formerly	“working	party	on	data	retention”	(AKVorrat.at).	This	NGO	took	action	against	the	comprehensive	blanket	data	retention	of	traffic	data	records	of	all	public	communication	services	and	successfully	conducted	a	lawsuit,	supported	by	11.167	people,	at	the	Austrian	constitutional	court	in	this	case.	Together	with	a	preliminary	request	from	Ireland	this	lead	to	the	abolition	of	the	Data	Retention	Directive	by	the	European	Court	of	Justice	(CJEU)	in	April	2014.	Walter	Hötzendorfer	is	Senior	Researcher	and	Senior	Consultant	at	the	Research	Institute,	Board	Member	of	the	Austrian	Computer	Society	(OCG)	and	Co-Chair	of	the	OCG	Forum	Privacy.	He	has	degrees	in	law	as	well	as	in	business	informatics	(information	systems)	and	experience	in	research,	legal	counselling	and	software	engineering.	From	2011	to	2016	he	was	a	Researcher	at	the	University	of	Vienna	Centre	for	Computers	and	Law,	where	he	has	worked	in	several	national	and	international	research	projects	and	did	a	PhD	on	Data	Protection	and	Privacy	by	Design	in	Federated	Identity	Management.	Walter’s	research	interests	span	data	protection	law,	privacy	by	design,	privacy	engineering,	electronic	identities,	public	security,	information	security,	cloud	computing,	telecommunication	and	the	legal	aspects	of	these	and	other	fields	of	ICT.	Alexander	Czadilek	is	since	2015	lawyer	at	epicenter.works	(formerly	AKVorrat.at)	in	Vienna,	which	is,	since	its	successful	campaign	for	the	anullment	of	the	data	retention	directive,	commited	to	the	fight	against	mass	surveillance.	In	addition	to	this	he	is	a	legal	reasearcher	at	Research	Institute	–	Digital	Human	Rights	Center	and	consultant	at	ky-center,	a	think	tank	for	social	media	law	(Vaduz,	Vienna,	Munich).	He	deals	with	data	protection	law	for	more	than	ten	years	and	is	author	and	speaker	in	the	fields	of	data	protection	law,	privacy	and	surveillance.	He	is	commited	to	the	preservation	of	freedom	rights	and	a	pluralistic	society.	The	Research	Institute	(RI)	is	a	young	private	research	and	consulting	centre	at	the	cutting	point	of	technology,	law	and	society,	which	covers	questions	about	human	rights	in	a	digital	society	through	a	multi-	and	interdisciplinary	perspective.	This	covers	technological	and	legal	aspects	of	data	protection	and	data	security	as	well	as	technological	impact	assessment,	cybercrime	and	political	strategies.	Renata	Salecl	is	a	Slovene	philosopher,	sociologist	and	legal	theorist.	She	is	a	senior	researcher	at	the	Institute	of	Criminology,	Faculty	of	Law	at	the	University	of	Ljubljana,	and	holds	a	professorship	at	Birkbeck	College,	University	of	London.	She	has	been	a	visiting	professor	at	London	School	of	Economics,	lecturing	on	the	topic	of	emotions	and	law.	Every	year	she	lectures	at	Benjamin	N.	Cardozo	School	of	Law	(New	York),	on	Psychoanalysis	and	Law,	and	she	has	also	been	teaching	courses	on	neuroscience	and	law.	From	2012,	furthermore,	she	is	visiting	professor	at	the	Department	of	Social	Science,	Heath	and	Medicine	at	King's	College	London.	Her	books	include:	Salecl,	R.	(2000).	Sexuation.	Durham,	North	Carolina:	Duke	University	Press;	Salecl,	R.	(2004).	On	anxiety.	London	New	York:	Routledge;	and	Salecl,	R.	(2010).	Choice.	London:	Profile.	The	books	have	been	translated	into	thirteen	languages.			
	 	 7	Aleš	Završnik,	Doctor	of	Law	(LL.D.),	is	a	Senior	Research	Fellow	at	the	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	in	Ljubljana	and	Associate	Professor	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	University	of	Ljubljana.	He	was	a	postdoctoral	fellow	at	the	University	of	Oslo	(2012)	and	at	the	Max-Planck-Institute	für	ausländisches	und	internationals	Strafrecht,	Freiburg	i.	Br.	(2009),	and	is	starting	with	Visiting	Fellowship	at	the	Collegium	Helveticum	Zürich,	a	joint	initiative	of	the	ETH	Zürich	and	the	University	of	Zürich	(2017-18).	He	collaborated	in	several	European	Cooperation	in	Science	and	Technology	(COST)	Actions,	e.g.	Living	in	Surveillance	Societies.	In	his	latest	research	Završnik	focused	on	surveillance	implications	of	drones	in	the	book	he	edited	Drones	and	Unmanned	Aerial	systems:	Legal	and	Social	Implications	for	Security	and	Surveillance.	He	also	co-edited	a	book	Crime	and	Transition	in	Central	and	Eastern	Europe	that	was	awarded	for	the	best	scientific	achievement	in	criminology	by	the	Slovenian	Research	Agency	in	2012.	He	has	extensively	researched	and	published	on	cybercrime,	IT-law,	surveillance,	crime	control	and	technology.	Završnik	conducts	ethical	analysis	for	security	and	ICT	projects,	e.g.	he	is	an	independent	Ethics	Expert	with	REA,	the	research	arm	of	the	European	Commission,	for	Horizon	2020	projects.	Among	others,	he	led	a	research	project	Law	in	the	Age	of	Big	Data:	Regulating	Privacy,	Transparency,	Secrecy	and	Other	Competing	Values	in	the	21st	Century	(funded	by	the	Slovenian	Research	Agency,	No.	J5-6823).	E-mail:	ales.zavrsnik@pf.uni-lj.si.	
	 	 8	Contact	Information	and	Registration	The	conference	is	organized	within	the	research	project	»Law	in	the	age	of	big	data:	Regulating	privacy,	transparency,	secrecy	and	other	competing	values	in	the	21st	century«	carried	out	at	the	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Ljubljana	and	Faculty	of	Law	University	of	Ljubljana,	and	coordinated	by	Assoc.	Professor	Aleš	Završnik.	It	is	funded	by	the	Slovenian	Research	Agency.			Venue	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana,	Poljanski	nasip	2,	SI-1000	Ljubljana,	Slovenia		Chair	of	the	Program	Committee	Aleš	Završnik,	LL.D.,	Assoc.	Professor		Program	Committee	• Professor	Frank	Pasquale,	University	of	Maryland,	Baltimore,	USA	• Professor	Renata	Salecl,	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law,	Slovenia	• Professor	Katja	Šugman	Stubbs,	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana,	Slovenia	• Associate	Professor	Primož	Gorkič,	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana,	Slovenia			Organising	Committee	• mag.	Maruša	Veber	• mag.	Maša	Kovič-Dine	• dr.	Mojca	M.	Plesničar	• Katja	Simončič,	Junior	Researcher	• Miha	Hafner,	Junior	Researcher	• Lara	Brecelj	• Klara	Cvar	• Maša	Gril	• Neja	Domnik			Contact	Aleš	Završnik,	LL.D.,	Assist.	Prof.,	E:	ales.zavrsnik@pf.uni-lj.si	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Ljubljana,	E:	inst.crim@pf.uni-lj.si	phone:	+386	(0)	1	4203	242		Conference	fees	Participants	of	the	conference,	i.e.	speakers	and	delegates	not	presenting	a	paper,	have	to	pay	a	conference	fee;	unless	invited	or	students	(in	the	latter	case,	please	provide	proof).		The	following	conference	fees	apply:	• full	pass	-	speakers:	100	EUR	• full	pass	-	delegates	(not	presenting	a	paper):	70	EUR	• full	pass	-	VIPs	(invited,	upon	an	appointment):	FREE	• students:	free	of	charge	(proof	must	be	provided)	• Early	bird	(until	April	22,	2017):	75	EUR	for	speakers;		40	EUR	for	delegates.	Delegates	and	students	can	register	via	e-mail:	inst.crim@pf.uni-lj.si		Please	pay	by	bank	transfer	to	IBAN:		SI56	0201	4025	3359	987,	SWIFT/BIC:	LJBASI2X	(Nova	ljubljanska	banka	d.d.,	Trg	republike	2,	1520	Ljubljana,	Slovenija).	Account	holder:	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Ljubljana,	Poljanski	nasip	2,	1000	Ljubljana,	Slovenia.	You	agree	that	your	personal	data	will	be	collected	and	processed	for	the	conference	purposes.	The	bank	transfer	is	the	only	payment	method	available.	At	the	conference,	you	must	provide	the	proof	of	payment.	
	 	 9	Programme		MONDAY	22nd	MAY	  Hour		Lecture	hall	 8:30	–	9:00	REGISTRATION	Gold		 Hour	INTRODUCITON	AND	WELCOME	Lecture	hall	 9:00	–	9:30	Prof.	Matjaž	Jager,	Director	of	the	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Prof.	Miha	Juhart,	Dean	of	the	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana		Gold	 	Keynote	session	1	Chair:	Aleš	Završnik		 9:30	–	11:00	 	 	Marko	Grobelnik:		Limits	of	the	current	state	of	Artificial	Intelligence	for	Law	Dean	Wilson:		Algorithmic	Patrol:	The	Futures	of	Predictive	Policing					Gold	 11:00	–	11:30	Coffee	break		 11:30	–	13:00	Keynote	session	2	Chair:	Aleš	Završnik		 	 	Nadya	Purtova:		Personal	data	for	common	good:	how	to	profit	from	Big	Data	sustainably		Alexander	Czadilek,	Christof	Tschohl	and	Walter	Hötzendorfer:		We	don’t	know	what	the	Questions	are,	but	we	know	we’re	gonna	find	the	Answers				Gold	 13:00	–	14:00 	Lunch		 		
	 	 10	MONDAY	22nd	MAY	BIG DATA AND PERSONAL DATA                          BIG DATA AND CRIMINAL  PROTECTION            PROCEDURE        Session	2	Seminar	room	5	Chair:	Katja	Simončič	1. Sabina	Zgaga:	Slovenian	criminal	intelligence	activity	and	protection		of	privacy		2. Primož	Gorkič:	Judicial	oversight	of	(mass)	collecting	and	processing	of	personal	data				3. Carolina	Are:	How	Are	the	Australian	Metadata	Laws	Affecting	the		Average	Social	Media	User?		4. Begüm	Bulak	Uygu:	Databases	and	Due	Process	with	regard	to			European	Court	of	Human	Rights’	Case-Law	 Hour		Session	1	Seminar	room	4	Chair:	Mojca	M.	Plesničar	14:00	–	15:30	1. Helena	Uršič:	Individual	control	over	personal	data	in	the	data-driven	economy			2. Lilian	Edwards	and	Michael	Veale:		Slave	to	the	Algo-rhythm?	Legal	and	technological	sticking	points	concerning	machine	learning	and	the	GDPR		3. Wenlong	Li:		Big	Data,	Data	Protection	and	Citizen	Empowerment		4. Maša	Galič:		Living	labs		and	big	data	in	practice:	Stratumseind	2.0	-	A	discussion	of	a	living	lab	in	the	Netherlands	 15:30	–	16:00	Coffee	break	
	 	 11	HUMAN RIGHTS, CRIMINAL JUSTICE                           BIG DATA POLICING AND BIG DATA                  Session	4	Seminar	room	5	Chair:	Miha	Hafner	1. Gregor	Urbas:		Automated	Cybercrime	Investigations:	The	example	of	“Sweetie	2.0”		2. Stanislaw	Tosza:		Cross-border	exchange	of	big	data	-	innovative	technology	meets	outdated	legal	framework		3. Federico	Costantini:	Social					network,	social	profiling,				predictive	policing.	Current								Issues	and	future	perspectives		4. Lydia	Morgan:	Reconfiguring	freedom:	Big	data,	the			Investigatory	Powers	Act	2016					and	the	construction	of	liberty								in	the	UK’s	security	state	 Hour	Session	3	Seminar	room	4	Chair:	Primož	Gorkič	16:00	–	17:30	1. Sorina	Ioana	Doroga:		Protecting	Individual	Rights	With	Basic	Tools	in	the	High-Tech	Era		2. Mojca	M.	Plesničar:	The	alluring	promise	of	objectivity:	Big	data	in	criminal	justice		3. Gavin	Robinson:	(Anti)Discrimination	and	Big	Data	Consumer	Credit	Risk	Analysis		4. Uwe	Ewald:	Big	Data	in	Criminal	Justice	–	Few	Chances	and	Serious	Risks	 Hour			17:30	–	WELCOME	RECEPTION	–	FACULTY	OF	LAW	Main	Hall	
	 	 12	TUESDAY	23rd	MAY		 Hour		Lecture	hall	8:30	–	9:00	REGISTRATION	Red		 Hour	Keynote	session	3	Chair:	Mojca	M.	Plesničar		Lecture	hall	9:00	–	10:30				Joanna	J.	Bryson:	Five	Reasons	Not	to	Personify	AI		Renata	Salecl:	Big	Data	–	Big	Ignorance				Red	10:30	–	11:00	Coffee	break		11:00	–	12:30	Keynote	session	4	Chair:	Mojca	M.	Plesničar		Lecture	hall			Tjerk	Timan:	“But	I	used	quotation	marks”:	data	science	methods	and	misinterpretations		Aleš	Završnik:	Algorithmic	prediction	in	crime	control					Red	12:30	–	13:30	Lunch			       
	 	 13	TUESDAY	23rd	MAY		BIG DATA KNOWLEDGE                                          BIG CYBER DATA AND                                                                                    INTERNATIONAL LAW              Hour	Session	5	Seminar	room	4	Chair:	Miha	Hafner	13:30	–	15:00	1. Michael	Veale:		How	do	public	sector	values	get	into	public	sector	machine	learning	systems,	if	at	all?	2. Matej	Kovačič,	Aljaž	Košmerlj:	Anonymisation	of	judicial	decisions	with	machine	learning	3. Janez	Štebe,	Sonja	Bezjak,	Irena	Bolko	and	Ana	Slavec:	Personal	Data	Protection	in	Social	Sciences	in	Big	Data	Era	4. Gašper	Fele-Žorž,	Andrej	Brodnik:	Hiding	large	amounts	of	data	in	virtual	disk	images		Session	6	Seminar	room	5	Chair:	Katja	Simončič	1. Vasilka	Sancin:		State’s	Due	Diligence		in	Cyberspace	in	the	Era	of	Big	Data		2. Mitko	Bogdanoski	and	Metodi	Hadji-Janev:			Finding	the	right	balance	between	security	and	privacy:						NATO	and	the	big	data	analyses		3. Maruša	T.	Veber:		Big	Data	and	Economic	Cyber	Espionage:	an	International	Law	Perspective		4. Maša	Kovič	Dine:		Economic	Cyber	Espionage	and	Regulation	of	Big					Data	Theft	at	the	International	Level	 15:00	–	15:30	Coffee	break	
	 	 14	                                 SOCIAL, ECONOMIC & HEALTH ASPECTS                                                                 OF BIG DATA                                    										*	Changes	to	the	program	can	be	made	in	the	run-up	to	the	conference.	All	the	changes	will	be	displayed	in	the	program	published	on	the	conference	web	page.	The	organizers	shall	not	be	liable	for	any	loss,	liability,	damage	or	expenses	suffered	or	incurred	by	any	person	due	to	the	changes.	 Hour	Session	7	Red	lecture	hall	Chair:	Maruša	T.	Veber	15:30	–	17:00	1. Zoran	Kanduč:	Dispensable	humans	and	indispensable	machines	in	the	context	of	class	and	social	control		2. Gianclaudio	Malgieri:	Pricing	(big)	data:	the	right	to	know	the	value	of	our	own	personal	data	3. Friderik	Klampfer,	Bojan	Musil,	Nenad	Čuš	Babič	and	Domen	Bajde:		Big	Data,	Psychodiagnostics	and	Threats	to	Personal	Autonomy			4. Tjaša	Zapušek:	Healthcare	Robots	and	the	Right	to	Privacy				 Hour	Red	lecture	hall	Chair:	Aleš	Završnik	17.00-17.15	CONCLUDING	REMARKS	
	 	 15	Abstracts	"But	I	used	quotation	marks"	-	data	science	methods	and	misinterpretations	Tjerk	Timan	TILT/	University	of	Tilburg	Whereas	Big	Data	in	itself	is	a	debatable	term	(for	computer	science	it	means	data	that	is	too	large	to	compute	by	a	single	machine,	where	for	social	science	it	means	data	is	too	large	to	analyze	by	one	human	researcher),	it	is	also	a	decontextualized	one,	and	therefor	it	leads	to	many	hyped	and	confusing	promises	in	society.	Questions	rise	about	big	data	by	whom	and	for	whom.	As	STS	researchers,	we	have	to	ask	what	kind	of	impact	BD	has,	or	can	have,	on	society,	but	also	what	kind	of	reflection	BD	is	giving	of	society.	Where	the	natural	sciences	have	already	adapted	to	a	computational	and	often	quantitative	way	of	working,	many	social	sciences	are	now	confronted	with	not	only	a	stronger	focus	on	quantitative	methods	of	working	(also	more	and	more	as	the	sole	accepted	method	of	working!),	but	also	have	to	deal	with	larger	heaps	of	data.		In	an	extreme	scenario,	the	promise	of	real-life	data	means	the	end	of	social	science	(one	can	analyze	“everything”	realtime	with	real	data).	However,	many	disciplines	in	social	science	and	therefor	many	types	of	knowledge	are	still	inductive	(not	deductive).	While	machines	can	make	data	into	other	forms	of	data	and	possibly	even	can	translate	data	into	forms	of	information,	this	information	still	needs	humans	and	contexts	in	order	to	produce	some	form	of	an	added	value.	In	that	sense,	this	new	possible	real-time	quantitative	turn	is	nothing	new;	its	just	more.	This	also	means	that	if	social	science	want	to	remain	relevant,	it	needs	to	be	able	to	counter	purely	quantitative	claims	and	understand	a	thing	or	two	about	data	science	methods.	One	way	of	doing	so	is	to	create	new	alliances	-	where	before	it	was	math	and	stats,	now	its	data	scientist	and	programmers	-	and	get	into	some	data	science	methods	and	tills	themselves	(yes,	this	also	holds	for	lawyers!).		In	this	talk	I	will	briefly	go	into	some	theoretical	assumptions	on	Big	Data	/	data	science	and	via	data	science	practices	and	examples,	I	will	show	how	misinterpretation	and	decontextualisation	of	data	lead	to	non-sensical	analysis	and	strange	representations	of	people	via	skewed	data	doubles.	I	will	conclude	by	attempting	a	make	connection	between	technical	and	legal	understandings	of	what	personal	data	can	be.	(Anti)Discrimination	and	Big	Data	Consumer	Credit	Risk	Analysis	Gavin	Robinson	University	of	Luxembourg	Recent	UK	legislation	facilitating	the	credit	scoring	of	SMEs	using	Big	Data	techniques	and	Open	Data	sources	threatens	to	hollow	out	information	management	norms	and	data	subject	rights	enshrined	in	privacy	and	data	protection	law	just	as	it	is	gathering	unprecedented	momentum	in	courts	and,	with	the	impending	application	of	the	General	Data	Protection	Regulation,	in	practice	across	the	EU.	At	the	national	level,	and	however	Brexit	may	pan	out,	it	is	doubtful	that	the	regulatory	re-shuffling	and	privacy-related	safeguards	bundled	into	the	legislative	stimulus	for	SME	credit	risk	scoring	are	likely	to	address	adequately	the	serious	accuracy,	transparency	and	accountability	concerns	of	individual	data	subjects	whose	life	chances	it	alters.	Would	the	effective,	full	enforcement	of	data	protection	principles	and	data	subject	rights	really	cripple	the	credit	reference	industry	to	the	detriment	of	the	nascent	economic	recovery,	or	is	there	a	middle	path	and	will	the	GDPR	provide	it?	This	paper	proposes	to	tackle	a	particularly	thorny	aspect	of	that	debate:	the	relationship	between	credit	risk	analysis	and	antidiscrimination.	It	begins	by	surveying	the	cutting-edge	of	consumer	credit	risk	tools,	products	for	which	“all	data	is	credit	data”:	their	sources,	processes	and	(unforeseen)	impacts	on	citizens.	The	latter,	
	 	 16	oft-neglected	aspect	is	then	unpacked	with	the	emphasis	placed	on	the	compatibility	of	such	tools	with	the	letter	and	the	spirit	of	antidiscrimination	laws	on	the	books	in	the	US	and	the	EU.	This	in	turn	implies	a	review	of	the	recent,	abundant	(mainly	US)	literature	on	discrimination	in	the	“scored	society”	(Zarsky),	“black	boxes”	(Pasquale)	and	disparate	impact	(Barocas	&	Selbst),	but	also	of	its	far	scarcer	European	counterpart	–	and	this	in	the	light	of	EU-level	antidiscrimination	norms	(e.g.	Article	21,	Charter	of	Fundamental	Rights	of	the	European	Union).	Is	ever-more-granular	Big	Data-powered	credit	risk	analysis	at	all	compatible	with	such	values?	What	might	be	the	impact	of	the	GDPR	in	this	regard?	How	ought	its	much-vaunted	provisions	on	profiling	be	interpreted	in	order	to	increase	the	transparency	of	credit	scorers	vis-à-vis	the	scored	–	and	how	are	they	likely	to	be	interpreted?	Algorithmic	Patrol:	The	Futures	of	Predictive	Policing	Dean	Wilson	University	of	Sussex	‘Predictive	Policing’	has	emerged	as	the	key	buzz	term	of	contemporary	policing.	Engaging	predictive	analytics	drawn	from	such	diverse	domains	as	disaster	prediction,	combat	situations	and	supply-chain	management,	predictive	policing	extends	the	promise	of	anticipating	crime	prior	to	its	actualization.	Marketing	materials	are	replete	with	strident	claims	of	future	crimes	that	are	calculable,	knowable	and	targetable	before	they	transpire.	Additionally,	predictive	policing	is	promoted	as	the	ideal	policing	technology	for	a	climate	of	fiscal	austerity,	with	the	capacity	to	direct	police	operations	in	a	cost-effective	fashion	–	removing	the	necessity	for	‘costly’	measures	such	as	community	engagement.	This	chapter	interrogates	the	claims	of	predictive	policing,	contextualizing	them	against	the	longer	trajectory	of	information	technology	within	police	organizations.	Predictive	policing	also	emerges	within	a	context	of	security	commodification	where	astute	marketing	has	advanced	the	view	that	future	criminal	acts	–	and	persons	–	can	be	rendered	visible	and	actionable	in	the	present.	In	common	with	the	central	tenets	of	dataism,	there	is	also	an	underlying	logic	that	predictions	will	be	rendered	evermore	precise	through	the	accumulation	and	integration	of	an	ever-expanding	array	of	data	sets.	While	acknowledging	that	the	outcomes	of	predictive	policing	are	likely	to	be	highly	contingent,	both	organizationally	and	geographically,	it	is	argued	that	it	represents	a	potentially	disturbing	trend	in	contemporary	policing.	The	limited	evaluation	evidence	to	date	suggests	an	elective	affinity	between	predictive	policing	and	the	‘criminologies	of	everyday	life’	such	as	rational	choice	and	routine	activities	theory,	that	privilege	asocial	technical	solutions.	The	integration	of	SOCMINT	(Social	Media	Intelligence)	also	presages	forms	of	algorithmically	guided	‘real-time’	anticipatory	policing	–	the	consequences	of	which	remain	uncertain.	Nevertheless,	it	is	argued	that	patterns	of	discriminatory	policing	and	their	attendant	militaristic	logics	may	well	escalate,	while	simultaneously	remaining	obscured	beneath	the	sheen	of	algorithmic	calculation.		Algorithmic	prediction	in	crime	control	Aleš	Završnik	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	The	paper	will	present	several	existent	uses	of	big	data	in	the	criminal	justice	system,	for	example,	for	the	prevention	of	payment	card	fraud	by	means	of	skimming;	for	the	prediction	of	crime	with	predictive	software;	the	use	of	algorithms	to	predict	the	recidivism	of	parolees.	Such	knowledge,	built	on	a	large	amount	of	seemingly	unrelated	data,	whose	credibility	is	based	on	complex	mathematical	algorithms,	may	legitimise	increased	social	control,	limit	privacy	and	undermine	the	basic	principles	of	criminal	procedure.	Taking	into	consideration	the	benefits	of	algorithmic	service,	the	paper	will	claim	that	our	society	will	have	to	find	a	balance	between	the	benefits	of	using	big	data	and	the	disturbing	effects	it	may	pose	for	society	(e.g.	abuse	through	data	fishing,	loss	and	theft	of	personal	data,	etc.).	It	will	present	the	pitfalls	of	reliance	on	big	data	
	 	 17	predictions	used	by	law	enforcement	and	criminal	justice	agencies	and	the	risks	big	data	carries	as	regards	encroachment	on	fundamental	liberties.	Anonymisation	of	judicial	decisions	with	machine	learning	Matej	Kovačič,	Aljaž	Košmerlj	Jozef	Stefan	Institute	Slovenian	Constitution	determines	that	court	proceedings	are	public.	This	means	that	court	hearings	(except	when	there	are	some	special	reasons,	for	instance	involved	minors,	government	secrets,	etc.)	shall	be	public,	and	judgments	shall	be	pronounced	publicly.	Therefore	public	has	the	right	to	know	the	decisions	of	judiciary	branch	of	power.	However,	publishing	court	decisions	is	also	believed	to	create	a	push	towards	unification	of	jurisprudence.	These	are	main	reasons	why	Slovenian	ministry	of	justice	wants	to	publish	all	court	decisions	on	the	Internet.	However,	Slovenian	Constitution	also	protects	personal	data,	so	court	decisions	should	be	published	on	the	Internet	in	anonymous	form.	Before	public	release,	all	personal	data	or	other	data	from	which	persons	involved	in	trial	could	be	identified,	should	be	removed	from	court	decision	In	a	presentation	we	will	present	a	tool	Tacita,	which	helps	in	this	anonymisation	process.	Tool	was	developed	at	Jožef	Stefan	Institute	and	uses	machine	learning	to	predict	which	part	of	a	court	decision	should	be	removed	(anonymised)	with	a	high	probability.	Tacita	is	not	working	completely	automatic,	but	helps	in	otherwise	time-consuming	manual	process	of	anonymisation.	We	will	also	show	how	the	tool	has	been	developed	and	which	tools	for	analyzing	natural	language	has	been	used.	Automated	Cybercrime	Investigations:	The	example	of	“Sweetie	2.0”	Gregor	Urbas	University	of	Canberra	Dutch	non-government	organisation	Terre	des	Hommes	in	2013	identified	over	a	thousand	predators	seeking	to	engage	in	Webcam	Child	Sex	Tourism	from	some	65	countries	over	a	period	of	about	10	weeks.	These	were	among	20,000	requests	directed	to	a	fictitious	10-year-old	Filipina	girl,	really	a	3-D	avatar	called	“Sweetie”,	operated	by	a	team	of	Terre	des	Hommes	researchers.	Numerous	referrals	to	police	and	prosecutions	followed,	the	first	resulting	conviction	being	that	of	an	Australian	citizen	in	2014.	A	more	sophisticated	and	automated	version	of	the	virtual	girl,	“Sweetie	2.0”,	now	operates	independently	as	a	chatbot	with	enhanced	detection	functionality	to	recognise	indecent	online	behaviour	and	chat	characteristics	associated	with	individuals,	which	can	be	stored	and	analysed	for	matching	with	chat	records	held	or	obtained	by	law	enforcement	or	third	parties.	These	developments	illustrate	the	expanding	scope	for	automated	detection	of	cybercrime,	including	online	child	exploitation	that	might	be	an	important	element	of	future	policing.	However,	most	legal	systems	are	not	yet	ready	for	automated	surveillance	devices	such	as	“Sweetie”	to	be	used	by	law	enforcement,	with	open	questions	about	the	legality	of	their	use	and	the	admissibility	of	evidence	thereby	obtained.	The	presentation	discusses	the	findings	of	the	2016	report	entitled	‘Legal	Aspects	of	Sweetie	2.0’	commissioned	by	Terre	des	Hommes	comparing	the	laws	of	nearly	twenty	countries,	against	the	substantive	and	procedural	frameworks	of	their	domestic	legal	systems	as	well	as	key	international	agreements	such	as	the	Council	of	Europe’s	Convention	on	Cybercrime	and	the	Lanzarote	Convention.		
	 	 18	Big	Data	–	Big	Ignorance	Renata	Salecl	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	In	today's	society,	people	are	monitoring	and	collecting	data	related	to	themselves.	As	people	with	the	help	of	various	applications	dutifully	record	their	daily	lives,	they	allow	companies	to	use	their	data	for	marketing	and	surveillance	purposes.	The	paper	first	looks	at	the	psychological	mechanisms	that	are	behind	the	desire	for	self-monitoring.	Second,	it	looks	at	the	way	corporations	exploit	these	desires.	And	third,	it	addresses	the	question	of	why	people	often	ignore	the	fact	that	data	that	is	collected	about	their	lives	can	easily	be	used	to	their	disadvantage.	Big	Data	and	Economic	Cyber	Espionage:	an	International	Law	Perspective	Maruša	T.	Veber	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	The	value	and	power	of	economic	big	data	is	increasingly	being	recognised	as	an	important	asset	of	States	in	their	endeavours	at	the	competitive	and	globalised	economic	markets.	Against	this	background	various	methods	to	gather	massive	amounts	of	secret,	publicly	unavailable	economic	information	of	third	States	are	being	used.	In	this	respect,	cyber	space	has	become	an	ultimate	tool	enabling	relatively	easy,	sophisticated	and	quick	access	to	large	amounts	of	confidential	information,	essential	for	the	performance	and	operation	of	businesses	and	economic	stability	of	States.	This	presentation	will	focus	on	economic	cyber	espionage	among	States	and	assesses	the	legality	of	such	activities	under	international	law.	It	will	provide	a	general	overview	of	three	relevant	international	legal	frameworks	governing	economic	cyber	espionage:	bilateral	agreements	between	States,	general	international	law	rules	on	non-intervention	and	trade	policy	tools.	It	will	argue	that	economically	motivated	cyber	espionage	activities	by	States	and	their	status	under	international	law	should	be	differentiated	from	other	forms	of	traditional	espionage	conducted	for	military,	strategic	and	security	reasons.	While	the	legality	of	traditional	espionage	activities	at	the	international	level	remain	uncertain,	we	are	witnessing	important	legal	developments	in	the	area	of	economic	cyber	espionage.	Big	Data	in	Criminal	Justice	–	Few	Chances	and	Serious	Risks	Uwe	Ewald	Ruhr-Universität	Bochum	in	Germany	Starting	from	the	Foucauldian	concept	of	the	“regime	of	truth”	in	criminal	justice	this	paper	will	present	findings	of	a	case	study	analyzing	a	complex	organized	crime	case	in	Germany	were	huge	amounts	of	digital	data	have	been	introduced	into	evidence.	As	findings	show	Big	Data	Evidence	(BDE)	are	about	to	alter	the	traditional	way	professionals	in	law	enforcement	and	criminal	justice	act	in	the	evidentiary	process.		First,	some	light	will	be	shed	on	the	BDE	challenges	for	the	investigation	and	analysis	of	serious	criminal	cases	and	possible	shortcomings	of	training	and	practice	of	crime	analysts	in,	e.g.,	Computer-Aided	Qualitative	Data	Analysis	(CAQDAS)	to	reliably	assess	the	probative	value.		Second,	the	new	situation	for	lawyers	at	trial	will	be	considered.	Most	current	lawyers	(in	Germany)	have	a	blind	spot	when	it	comes	to	empirical	analysis	of	digital	evidentiary	mass	data	retrieved	from	ICT-devices	or	collected	by	means	of	electronic	surveillance.	There	is	in	particular	no	clear	understanding	regarding	the	way	how	information	is	produced	from	these	digital	data,	eventually	forming	evidentiary	knowledge	and	needed	to	apply	substantive	law	in	a	credible	manner.		
	 	 19	Third,	serious	risks	will	be	discussed	which	arise	in	light	of	BDE	from	the	mismatch	of	criminal	procedural	frameworks	and	practical	requirements	in	the	analysis	by	legal	experts.	Moreover,	BDE	tends	to	create	what	data	science	calls	“ambient	intelligence”	which	jeopardizes	basic	principles	of	modern	criminal	law	such	as	“presumption	of	innocence”,	“equality	of	arms”	or	“public	trial”	–	if	not	handled	properly	at	the	levels	of	legal	education,	judicial	practice	and	law-making.		Finally,	some	suggestions	should	be	offered	on	how	to	conceptualize	truth-finding	and	BDE	and	how	to	limit	the	risks	for	a	fundamental	human	rights	and	rule	of	law	centered	approach	in	criminal	justice.	Big	Data,	Data	Protection	and	Citizen	Empowerment:	The	Revival	of	Individual	Participation	Principle	as	a	Response	to	New	Technological	Challenges	Wenlong	Li	The	University	of	Edinburgh	The	individual’s	participation	in	protecting	personal	data	was	greatly	respected	and	considered	a	major	principle	while	modern	data	protection	rules	were	taking	shape	in	the	1980s.	During	the	following	decades,	however,	the	principle	has	been	largely	underutilised	for	the	reason	that	individuals	oftentimes	find	it	difficult	to	get	involved	in	such	undertaking.	This	has	been	further	deteriorated	when	big	data	analytics	formulate	an	unpredictable	data	dynamic	that	creates	a	wide	range	of	economic,	cognitive	and	operational	obstacles	for	individuals	to	stay	relevant.		This	paper	attempts	to	examine	to	what	extent	can	data	protection	law	accommodate	and	achieve	the	idea	of	‘citizen	empowerment’	and	focuses	on	the	role	of	an	individual	in	minimising	the	risks	and	harms	of	big	data	analytics.	It	principally	looks	at	the	legislative	efforts	in	the	EU	reform	of	data	protection	law,	aside	from	the	emergence	of	decentralised	technologies	that	assist	individuals	in	fully	controlling	their	personal	data.		The	paper	begins	by	tracing	back	to	the	foundation	of	data	protection	law	–	the	OCED	Privacy	Framework.	It	takes	the	individual	participation	principle	it	creates	as	an	entry	point	and	examines	its	compatibility	with	the	idea	of	citizen	empowerment.	Particularly,	the	paper	argues	the	importance	of	individual	checks	among	a	majority	of	paternalistic	and	corporate-centric	rules	and	explores	the	legal	basis	for	achieving	citizen	empowerment	and	user-centric	rules	in	the	context	of	data	protection.	Further,	it	examines	the	flexibility	of	individual	participation	principle	in	the	era	of	big	data	and	looks	at	the	European	approach	to	user	control,	taking	the	newly	created	right	to	data	portability	as	a	case	study.	Notably,	this	right	is	considered	a	critical	step	to	formulate	a	new	dynamic	featuring	‘individual	centricity’,	thus	enabling	individuals	to	take	advantage	of	personal	data	for	their	own	good	and	ultimately	share	the	enormous	benefits	of	big	data.	Big	Data,	Psychodiagnostics	and	Threats	to	Personal	Autonomy	Friderik	Klampfer,	Bojan	Musil,	Nenad	Čuš	Babič	and	Domen	Bajde	University	of	Maribor	Experts	and	institutions	have	warned	of	the	threat	that	big	data	analysis	poses	to	our	right	to	privacy,	the	challenge	it	raises	to	our	traditional	notions	of	criminal	responsibility	and	justice,	as	well	as	concerns	about	the	rising	levels	of	invisible	and	unaccountable	social	control	(EDPS	2015).	And	yet,	surprisingly	little	has	been	written	so	far	about	its	damaging	potential	for	our	personal	autonomy	as	consumers	and	citizens.	This	is	even	more	surprising	given	the	psychodiagnostic	research	that	has	been	conducted	and	developed	in	recent	years	(Kosinski	et	al	2013,	Youyou	et	al	2015,	Park	et	al	2015,	Musil	et	al	2017),	which	is	also	being	aggressively	marketed	to,	and	used	by,	economic	and	political	stakeholders	as	well	as	political	parties	and	organizations,	as	a	powerful	tool	of	non-rational	persuasion.		
	 	 20	In	the	paper,	we	first	provide	an	overview	and	an	assessment	of	those	psychodiagnostic	and	psychoprognostic	computing	tools	that	are	currently	making	headlines.	We	try	to	dispel	the	fog	of	self-promotion	and	spin	to	see	its	real,	not	merely	imagined	or	hyped-up,	diagnostic	potential.	How	accurate	are	“psychograms”	based	on	an	analysis	of	people’s	seemingly	innocuous	online	activities?	Is	there	any	substance	to	the	claim	that	computer	algorithms	can	know	us	better	than	we	know	ourselves?	Next,	we	assess	the	bold	promises	that	the	knowledge	of	a	variety	of	psycho-social	facts	about	individual	users	of	ICT	enables	us	to	match	every	particular	message	to	a	particular	addressee’s	emotions,	needs,	and	preferences	to	an	extent	that	was	unimaginable	a	decade	ago.	Can	we	really,	by	means	of	this	new	technology,	manipulate	people’s	minds,	choices	and	behavior	much	more	efficiently	than	ever	before?	And	what	implications	does	this	have	for	our	self-understanding	as	rational	and	autonomous	beings,	not	to	mention	the	elevated	moral	standing	that	comes	with	it?	Manipulation	is	one	of	the	most	familiar	but	also	increasingly	common	threats	to	personal	autonomy,	which	in	turn	is	widely	considered	as	worthy	of,	and	even	commanding,	(almost)	unconditional	respect.	Accordingly,	every	charge	of	manipulation	needs	to	be	taken	seriously	from	the	moral	point	of	view.	But	does	targeted,	individualized	commercial	and	political	online	advertising	amount	to	vicious,	morally	problematic	manipulation	at	all?	In	order	to	answer	this,	we	provide	a	tentative	definition	of	manipulative,	as	opposed	to	non-manipulative,	attitudinal	and	behavioral	influence.	We	then	show	targeted	advertising	exploitative	of	Internet	users’	identified	cognitive	shortcomings	and	emotional	vulnerabilities	manipulative.	We	lament	the	commercialization	of	politics	and	offer	an	explanation	of	what	renders	manipulation	of	citizens’	choices	particularly	problematic,	even	compared	to	daily	tampering	with	our	consumerist	choices.	Finally,	for	the	purpose	of	policy	recommendations,	we	envision	three	future	scenarios:	(a)	pessimistic,	(b)	optimistic,	and	(c)	balanced,	arguing	that	while	self-regulation	and	an	opt-out	option	of	data	sharing	may	be	sufficient	for	the	second	and	the	third,	the	onset	of	the	first	would	require	the	passing	of	restrictive	data-protection	legislation	if	we	are	to	preserve	our	core	democratic	values	and	institutions.	Big	health	data	on	social	networking	platforms:	The	legal	and	ethical	questions	Maria	Tzanou	Keele	University	This	contribution	seeks	to	explore	the	legal	and	ethical	questions	that	arise	from	the	use	of	personal	health	data	in	online	social	media.	Health	data,	which	refers	to	information	concerning	an	individual’s	health	or	disability	can	be	exchanged	in	a	number	of	different	ways	in	social	media:	i)	through	specific	health-related	networking	platforms,	such	as	Patientslikeme;	ii)	through	general	networking	platforms,	such	as	Facebook	and	Twitter;	and,	iii)	through	health	and	fitness	applications,	such	as	wearable	devices,	which	collect	data	about	the	bodily	functioning,	including	eating,	sleeping,	and	other	activity	habits	of	the	individual	and	can	be	integrated	with	social	media	and	share	this	information	in	order	to	showcase	the	user’s	personal	performance	statistics.	Sharing	of	health	data	in	social	media	raises	major	ethical	and	legal	questions	relating	to	privacy,	data	protection	and	personal	autonomy	and	dignity	as	well	as	the	issue	of	the	surveillance	of	digital	communities.	The	present	contribution	aims	to	investigate	these	challenges	and	critically	evaluate	the	possibilities	of	the	currently	available	legal	and	regulatory	frameworks	at	the	EU	and	the	international	level	to	effectively	protect	big	health	data	from	the	widespread	surveillance	and	monitoring	of	online	communities	by	both	government	authorities	(in	order	to	fight	terrorism	and	serious	crime)	and	the	private	sector	(private	insurance	companies,	companies	offering	health	products	or	services,	marketing	and	advertising	companies).	
	 	 21	Cross-border	exchange	of	big	data	-	innovative	technology	meets	outdated	legal	framework	Stanislaw	Tosza	University	of	Liège	In	order	to	effectively	investigate	and	prosecute	criminal	offences,	law	enforcement	must	have	access	to	digital	data,	which	is	mostly	in	possession	of	Internet	service	providers,	often	located	abroad.	The	law	of	criminal	procedure	allows	the	authorities	to	access	this	data,	while	protecting	suspects’	procedural	safeguards.	However,	when	the	service	provider	is	located	in	another	country	or	the	data	is	stored	abroad,	law	enforcement	should	in	principle	resort	to	mutual	legal	assistance	(MLA)	because	their	coercive	powers	are	limited	to	their	national	territory.		MLA	procedure	is	cumbersome	and	lengthy.	In	view	of	its	deficiencies,	authorities	have	a	tendency	to	circumvent	MLA	rules	in	practice.	For	instance,	they	request	data	directly	from	the	service	providers	or	conduct	digital	searches	in	computers	systems	located	abroad	(e.g.	by	means	of	Trojan	horses).	The	latter	option	is	questionable	as	it	consists	in	a	unilateral,	covert	access	to	data	on	foreign	territory.	The	first	method	puts	at	risk	the	rights	of	the	persons	affected.	Furthermore,	if	a	service	provider	refuses	to	cooperate,	the	problem	arises	as	to	how	to	enforce	the	cooperation	request.		This	conundrum	becomes	even	more	complex	because	of	the	use	of	cloud	services	or	encryption.	It	becomes	particularly	challenging	by	the	growing	tendency	and	need	to	use	big	data	by	law	enforcement.	The	latter	problem	has	not	been	comprehensively	addressed.	This	may	presumably	favour	direct	cooperation	with	service	providers.	Yet,	it	also	requires	protection	of	the	rights	of	affected	persons.	The	aim	of	this	paper	is	to	demonstrate	how	the	technological	developments	and	the	needs	of	law	enforcement	challenge	the	existing	legal	framework	and	critically	analyse	from	that	perspective	the	solutions	currently	being	discussed	within	the	EU	and	the	US.	Databases	and	Due	Process	with	regard	to	European	Court	of	Human	Rights’	Case-Law	Begüm	Bulak	Uygun	Yeditepe	University	Security	concerns	are	at	the	forefront	of	data	storage.	The	increasing	use	of	databases	in	the	criminal	procedure	raises	problems	in	terms	of	ensuring	the	respect	and	protection	of	fundamental	rights.	Databases	are	in	widespread	use	in	the	criminal	justice	field	across	the	world.	These	instruments	have	undoubted	advantages:	databases	contribute	considerably	to	the	investigation	of	the	crime,	ensure	rapid	intervention	at	the	investigation	level,	and	allow	the	possibility	of	making	an	information	exchange	between	countries.	On	the	other	hand,	they	have	undoubtedly	an	impact	on	individual	privacy.	The	use	of	this	type	of	investigative	tools	creates	a	need	for	appropriate	regulation	for	the	use	and	storage	of	the	data	collected	in	order	to	safeguard	the	dissemination	and	access	to	personal	data.	Whilst	the	use	of	such	measures	by	law	enforcement	agencies	is	common,	mass	surveillance	as	opposed	to	targeted	surveillance	constitutes	an	interference	with	the	right	to	privacy	and	the	rights	of	the	defence	such	as	the	presumption	of	innocence.	In	particular,	specific	protection	is	needed	to	ensure	the	right	protection	for	the	individual's	privacy.	If	the	enforcement	of	the	criminal	laws	requires	the	preservation	of	personal	information	greater	awareness	is	needed	of	the	threat	to	privacy	implicit	in	the	accumulation	of	vast	amounts	of	personal	information	in	data	banks.	Clearly,	a	high	level	of	protection	of	the	personal	data	of	individuals	would	ensure	effective	judicial	co-operation	in	criminal	matters	and	police	cooperation.		Further	to	an	analysis	of	the	legal	framework	that	applies	to	the	relationship	between	surveillance	and	data	protection,	this	paper	will	try	to	figure	out	how	to	overcome	the	limits	of	privacy.	While	doing	so,	the	main	argument	will	not	be	just	a	question	of	balance	between	data	protection	and	national	security	as	such.	Mass	surveillance	entails	a	challenge	to	core	privacy	principles	for	how	personal	data	must	be	processed	in	a	reasonable,	correct	and	legitimate	manner.	Given	that	data	retention	in	the	field	of	telecommunication	
	 	 22	challenges	the	very	foundations	of	the	rule	of	law,	the	focus	is	instead	on	a	larger	scale	being	the	impact	of	this	conflict	on	due	process	rights	in	a	democratic	society.		This	paper	suggests	an	analysis	of	the	recent	case-law	of	the	ECtHR	on	the	issue.	In	particular,	the	privacy	challenges	associated	with	surveillance,	primarily	within	the	realm	of	the	criminal	justice	databases	will	be	highlighted.	More	specifically,	this	paper	sketches	the	extent	to	which	data	protection	laws	interacts	with	the	criminal	procedural	law	in	order	to	evaluate	the	effectiveness	of	police	and	judicial	cooperation.	When	assessing	the	individual’s	privacy	in	the	area	of	criminal	law,	the	concern	must	be	the	extent	to	which	criminal	procedures	are	constrained	by	a	respect	for	privacy.	One	of	the	basic	issues	is	the	admissibility	of	evidence	from	law	enforcement-related	databases.	Dispensable	humans	and	indispensable	machines	in	the	context	of	class	and	social	control		Zoran	Kanduč	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	The	paper	deals	with	the	use,	or	rather	with	the	abuse,	of	(both	“smart”	and	“stupid”)	machines	as	the	means	controlling	(and	disciplining)	working	class	(individuals	who	have	to	sell	their	working	power	to	the	private	or	public	master	in	order	to	get	the	money	they	need	for	living),	workers	in	(formal	and	informal)	work	places,	consumers	and	citizens.	In	particular,	we	emphasize	the	role	of	“labour-saving”	technology	(as	the	result	of	modern	science)	in	the	class	and	imperialist	(dubbed	as	“anti-terrorist”)	war	(in	fine,	in	the	war	of	the	rich	against	“the	rest	of	the	world”),	i.e.	in	the	destructive	and	irrational	capitalist	economy	(functioning	as	gigantic	anonymous	“automaton”	or,	in	Marx’s	words,	“automated	subject”),	and	its	reproduction	and	transformation.	Obviously,	machines	can	easily	substitute	humans,	because	they	already	function	as	quasi	automata,	personifications	of	specific	economic	categories	and	following	the	dominant	type	of	rationality	(“algorithms”)	imposed	on	them	by	the	capitalist	social	relationships	and	structures	(existing	in	them	in	the	form	of	personal	dispositions,	attitudes,	desires,	beliefs,	and	aspirations).	Yet,	humans	–	working	in	private	enterprises	(tyrannies)	or	repressive	state	apparatuses	–	are	problematic	because	of	their	“all	too	human”	characteristics,	not	just	emotions,	passions	or	vices	(e.g.	“laziness”	or	even	allergy	to	work),	but	potentiality	or	actuality	of	disobedience,	i.e.	the	possibility	of	saying	“No!”	to	the	masters	or	even	to	fight	against	them	in	order	to	destroy	their	economic,	political,	legal,	and	ideological	(or	cultural)	power.	Machines	may	have	some	deficiencies	or	imperfections,	but	they	have	one	crucial	quality.	Namely,	they	are	always	obedient	to	the	masters.	Moreover,	they	are	the	increasingly	important	reason	for	fearful	and	shameful	obedience	(or	even	grotesque	conformism)	of	formally	and	informally	employed	“voluntary	slaves”	(or	rather	“auto-mobiles”),	many	of	whom,	nevertheless,	manage	to	find	justifiable	alibis	in	joys	obtained	from	commercial	goods,	e.g.	private	cars,	TV	sets,	personal	computers,	mobile	phones,	or	legal	and	illegal	psycho-active	substances.	Of	course,	the	technology	(even	in	its	most	advanced,	“smart”	or	“intelligent”	forms)	is	by	no	means	invincible.	And	what	is	more,	the	rich	–	as	the	legal,	but	not	legitimate	rulers	of	the	world	–	can	be	defeated	even	more	easily.	They,	of	course,	have	a	lot	of	money	(with	which	they	can	buy	humans),	but	it	is	not	really	theirs.	It	is	stolen,	albeit	legally.	And	it	is	or	remains	theirs	primarily	because	of	the	state	force	and	omnipresent	economic	and	legal	propaganda	fulling	“enough	people	enough	time”.	So	the	main	problem	seems	to	be	human	stupidity,	not	as	inborn	characteristic,	but	as	socially	constructed	and	permanently	reproduced.	Is	it	insuperable,	so	that	there	is	really	just	one	alternative?	
	 	 23	Economic	Cyber	Espionage	and	Regulation	of	Big	Data	Theft	at	the	International	Level	Maša	Kovič	Dine	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	Many	governments	are	resorting	to	some	sort	of	economic	cyber	espionage/exploitation	for	various	reasons.	With	the	development	of	Internet	technologies,	it	has	become	easier	and	more	inexpensive	to	carry	out	data	theft.	The	benefits	of	such	theft	include	important	competitive	advantages	on	the	globalised	market	both	for	benefiting	companies	as	for	the	sponsoring	States.	At	the	same	time,	such	theft	causes	serious	damage	to	the	targeted	company,	mostly	in	the	loss	of	profit	and	a	loss	of	years	of	research	and	development.	As	the	topic	is	a	relatively	new	issue	in	international	law,	few	attempts	at	regulation	have	been	made.	Mostly	due	to	the	fact	that	all	states	resort	to	some	sort	of	espionage.	However,	the	consequences	of	the	failure	to	regulate	economic	cyber-exploitation	are	serious,	rendering	a	need	for	its	regulation	at	the	international	level.	Economic	cyber-exploitation	is	characteristically	similar	to	pillage	of	natural	resources.	Thus	the	law	on	prohibition	of	pillage	could	provide	a	basis	for	designing	the	regulation	on	economic	cyber-exploitation	and	prohibit	such	activities.	Theft	is	theft,	however	it	is	carried	out	and	whatever	the	information	that	is	stolen.	When	economic	cyber-exploitation	is	taking	place	among	states,	an	international	response	is	necessary.	Finding	the	right	balance	between	security	and	privacy:	NATO	and	the	big	data	analyses	Mitko	Bogdanoski,	Metodi	Hadji-Janev		Military	academy	“General	Mihailo	Apostolski-Skopje”	During	its	last	Chief	of	transformation	conference	held	in	Norfolk	in	2016	NATO’s	chiefs	of	transformation	have	recognized	that	big	data	phenomenon	has	become	one	of	the	most	promising	and	prevailing	technology	to	predict	future	trends.	Big	data	analyses	may	enable	NATO	to	automatically	process	and	extract	valuable	insights,	predict	patterns	and	enhance	decision	making.	However,	put	in	the	context	of	NATO’s	commitment	to	respect	international	law	big	data	analyses	raise	serious	concerns	with	regards	to	the	individual	freedoms	in	general	and	personal	data	protection	in	more	specific	sense.	The	paper	will	briefly	explain	how	big	data	analyzes	may	enhance	NATO’s	mission	accomplishment.	It	will	then	evaluate	how	and	why	finding	the	right	balance	between	security	and	individual	freedoms	(especially	personal	data	protection)	are	essential	for	NATO’s	mission	accomplishment	while	employing	big	data	analyses.	Five	Reasons	Not	to	Personify	AI	Joanna	J.	Bryson	University	of	Bath	and	Center	for	Information	Technology	Policy	at	Princeton	University	Artificial	Intelligence	is	often	treated	as	an	alien	force	or	an	unruly,	potentially	dangerous	child.		In	fact,	AI	is	just	a	special	case	of	computation	being	commodified,	which	is	to	say	that	the	means	by	which	AI	is	changing	society	are	not	trivial,	but	are	less	transparent	than	simple	opposition.		Intelligence	is	the	triggering	of	appropriate	actions	in	response	to	perceived	events.		Information	technology	has	been	allowing	humans	to	enhance	our	capacity	to	do	this	arguably	for	thousands	of	years.	It	allows	us	to	both	remember	and	perceive	more	than	we	could	as	individuals,	which	in	turn	allows	us	to	innovate	at	cooperate	in	unprecedented	ways,	sometimes	at	the	expense	of	each	other,	other	groups	or	the	rest	of	the	ecosystem.		In	this	talk	I	establish	a	clear,	science-based,	functionalist	definition	of	intelligence,	and	artificial	intelligence,	demonstrating	from	this	that	concerns	about	artificial	general	intelligence	and	superintelligence	are	misguided,	though	in	different	ways.		Then	I	will	talk	about	efforts	to	regulate	AI,	with	a	focus	on	the	British	efforts	going	back	six	years	now	with	the	Principles	of	Robotics.		Finally	I	will	address	why	we	should	not	
	 	 24	construct	AI	to	be	legal	or	moral	agents	–	not	because	such	construction	is	impossible,	but	because	it	is	ill	advised	and	easily	avoided,	at	least	for	commercial	products.	Healthcare	Robots	and	the	Right	to	Privacy	Tjaša	Zapušek	University	of	Copenhagen,	Faculty	of	Law	The	paper	reveals	author’s	personal	conclusions	derived	from	the	fact	that	an	increasing	autonomy	of	robots	is	not	a	science	fiction,	yet	it	presents	a	notorious	feature	of	modern	era	that	requires	a	comprehensive	and	systematic	legal	approach.	However,	a	European	Parliaments’	recently	issued	recommendation	to	consider	robots	as	electronic	persons	seems	inappropriate	from	human	rights	perspective	and	may	reflect	in	serious	violations	of	fundamental	rights	attached	to	all	human	beings.	This	article	focuses	on	negative	aftermaths	of	automaton	and	the	impact	they	have	on	health	law	and	the	right	to	privacy.	The	fundamental	principle	of	healthcare	ethics,	a	protection	of	patient’s	clinical	records	presents	a	cornerstone	of	doctor-patient	confidential	relationship.	The	latter	is,	due	to	its	importance,	protected	not	only	by	national	health	legislations,	yet	also	by	Article	8	of	the	European	Convention	on	Human	Rights,	Right	to	privacy.	Among	the	latest	medical	achievements	is	the	revelation	of	the	alternative	to	a	person	in	a	white	coat,	a	robot	that	can	perform	the	surgery	completely	on	its	own,	has	individual	sessions	with	autistic	persons	etc.	As	already	mentioned,	medicine	is	a	profession	that	requires	a	certain	level	of	maintenance	of	secrecy	of	confidential	information	and	according	to	the	previous	Court’s	decisions	the	secrecy	is	even	more	important	in	cases	that	involves	psychiatric	records.	The	robots’	involvement	in	medical	treatments	on	one	hand	and	easy	access	to	the	information	they	gain	during	the	treatment	on	the	other,	bring	into	question	the	effectiveness	of	the	provisions	of	Article	8	of	the	European	Convention	on	Human	Rights.	Law	allows	individuals,	pledged	to	secrecy	to	bypass	the	provisions	of	Article	8(2)	of	the	ECHR.	The	mentioned	paragraph	states,	that	any	disclosure	must	be	in	accordance	with	the	law	and	have	legitimate	purpose,	moreover	it	has	to	be	proportionate	in	accordance	with	the	law	and	necessary	pursuant	to	the	democratic	society.		The	presence	of	robot	doctors	rises	many	questions	such	as,	what	kind	of	consequences	will	have	the	disclosure	by	robot	doctors?	Does	it	mean	that	robots	are/will	be	capable	of	evaluating	the	importance	of	particular	information	and	therefore	will	it	possess	a	moral	sense?	Or,	will	a	robot,	due	to	its	mechanical	nature	be	used	as	a	simple	tool	in	order	to	gain	some	important	information	that	have	been	saved	on	the	its	disc?		Current	legislations	in	countries	around	the	world	do	not	put	much	attention	on	this	particular	area,	even	though	the	modern	robotic	approaches	have	already	been	introduced	and	also	very	well	accepted.	Hiding	large	amounts	of	data	in	virtual	disk	images	Gašper	Fele-Žorž,	Andrej	Brodnik,		Faculty	of	Computer	and	Information	Science,	University	of	Ljubljana	Over	the	past	few	decades,	multiple	methods	for	hiding	data	in	on	hard	drives	have	been	devised.	Most	of	these	depend	on	unallocated	space	either	between	or	within	filesystems.	Since	methods	for	hiding	data	may	also	be	used	by	criminals,	they	are	of	interest	to	digital	forensic	investigators.	Tools	used	by	investigators	therefore	usually	support	features	which	can	be	used	to	inspect	data	within	places	where	data	may	be	hidden,	such	as	deleted	files,	unallocated	sectors	or	alternate	data	streams.	Widely	available	virtualization	of	and	on	personal	computers	can	be	used	to	support	old	software	which	might	otherwise	not	run	on	modern	hardware.	Virtualization	is	also	essential	in	developing	low-level	software,	such	
	 	 25	as	operating	systems,	and	is	an	essential	component	of	all	solutions	for	cloud	computing.	Virtualization	technologies	are	therefore	widely	used	and	will	likely	remain	popular	in	the	foreseeable	future.	With	virtual	computers	it	is	often	more	convenient	to	use	files	as	virtual	hard	drives	instead	of	physical	disks.	These	files	are	typically	large,	so	data	could	potentially	be	hidden	within	them,	depending	on	the	virtual	disk	image	format.	We	have	analyzed	the	most	popular	virtual	disk	image	file	formats	and	devised	three	general	approaches	for	hiding	data	within	such	files.	Two	of	these	approaches	allow	large	amounts	of	data	to	be	hidden.	The	hidden	data	is	unlikely	to	be	detected	by	current	digital	forensics	tools.	New	techniques	and	procedures	will	have	to	be	developed	to	detect	such	data.	We	have	implemented	one	of	the	approaches	which	can	be	used	to	store	practically	unlimited	amounts	of	data	in	a	library	which	is	freely	available.	How	Are	the	Australian	Metadata	Laws	Affecting	the	Average	Social	Media	User?	Carolina	Are	University	of	Sydney	This	paper	analyses	the	increased	surveillance	the	Australian	population	has	experienced	after	the	terrorist	attacks	of	9/11.	Examining	the	Telecommunications	(Interception	and	Access)	Amendment	(Data	Retention)	Act	2015	No.	39,	2015,	also	known	as	‘metadata	laws’,	this	research	attempts	to	identify	the	reasons	behind	this	increased	surveillance	in	the	era	of	Islamic	State	(ISIS)’s	thorough	use	of	social	media	platforms	to	incite	and	recruit	new	terrorists	(Klausen	2015;	Stern	and	Berger	2015).	Examining	the	necessity	and	proportionality	of	the	laws	in	accordance	with	the	United	Nations’	(UN)	Universal	Declaration	of	Human	Rights	(UDHR)	(UN	1948),	this	paper	sets	out	to	establish	how	the	average	social	media	savvy	citizen	is	likely	to	be	affected	by	this	restrictive	and	conservative	turn	in	the	Australian	criminal	justice	and	anti-terrorism	landscape.	It	is	expected	that	cracking	down	on	average	social	network	users	in	order	to	spot	and	punish	terrorist	organisations	and	their	unlawful	use	of	the	internet	and	social	media	is	likely	to	produce	mixed,	if	not	unsuccessful,	results.	How	do	public	sector	values	get	into	public	sector	machine	learning	systems,	if	at	all?	Michael	Veale	University	College	London	More	machine	learning	algorithm–powered	decision-support	systems	are	piloted	and	deployed	in	the	public	sector	each	day	to	help	detect	individuals	and	corporate	wrongdoing	in	areas	such	as	taxation,	child	protection	and	policing.	While	some	welcome	this	trend	as	the	dawn	of	more	evidence-based	administrative	decision-making,	others	worry	that	the	opacity	and	perceived	objectivity	of	such	systems	usher	in	unwanted	biases	through	the	back	door	just	as	they	kick	due	process	out.		Studies	of	these	systems	have	primarily	attempted	to	look-in	or	reverse-engineer	them	from	the	outside,	missing	the	people	that	obtain,	deploy	and	manage	these	technologies	within	diverse	institutional	contexts.	To	help	fill	this	gap,	25	public	servants	and	technologists	from	different	sectors	and	countries	involved	in	public	sector	machine	learning	projects	were	identified	and	interviewed.	They	were	asked	about	their	experiences	with	these	technologies,	focussing	on	how	they	understood	and	approached	operational	barriers	and	ethical	issues	they	encountered.	Analysis	of	these	interviews	shows	promising	roles	for	recent	technological	approaches	to	responsibility	in	this	field	such	as	‘fairness-aware’	or	interpretable	machine	learning	systems.	Yet	these	interviews	also	raise	questions	and	issues	that	are	both	currently	underemphasised	and	unlikely	to	be	resolved	by	technical	solutions	alone.	This	research	suggests	that	governance	mechanisms	for	applied	
	 	 26	machine-learning	must	be	more	sensitive	to	on-the-ground	pressures	and	contexts	if	they	are	to	succeed	in	ensuring	new	data-driven	decision-support	systems	are	societally	beneficial.	Individual	control	over	personal	data	in	the	data-driven	economy	Helena	Uršič	Center	for	Law	and	Digital	Technologies,	Leiden	Law	School	Control	over	personal	data	processing	is	an	integral	part	of	the	fundamental	right	to	personal	data	protection.	In	the	era	of	big	data	and	growing	digital	economy,	data	subject	control	rights	such	as	the	right	to	erasure	and	the	right	to	access	face	important	challenges.	It	is	disputable	whether	new	circumstances	still	allow	for	meaningful	control	over	personal	data	processing.	To	answer	this	question,	the	contribution	at	hand	examines	legal	framework	for	commercial	data	use	and	reuse,	paying	special	regard	to	the	provisions	on	individual	rights.	Drawing	on	this	analysis,	it	will	be	shown	how	the	meaning	of	individual	rights	and	their	implications	have	been	changing	in	the	light	of	big	data.	Judicial	oversight	of	(mass)	collecting	and	processing	of	personal	data		Primož	Gorkič	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	The	paper	explores	different	approaches	to	securing	judicial	oversight	of	collecting	and	processing	of	personal	data	in	a	criminal	justice	system.	It	focuses	on	traffic	communication	and	DNA	data.	A	brief	comparative	overview	show	that	the	need	to	establish	judicial	oversight	very	much	corresponds	to	the	manner	the	right	to	privacy	is	conceptualised	within	a	specific	jurisdiction.	On	one	side,	the	US	relies	heavily	on	the	concept	of	reasonable	expectation	of	privacy		(privacy	as	secrecy,	Solove).	On	the	other	side,	European	jurisdictions	-	although	not	uniformly	-	view	privacy	protection	as	an	integral	part	of	protecting	one's	personhood	and	dignity.	The	paper	explores	the	clash	of	the	two	competing	conceptions	within	US	jurisdictions,	particularly	after	the	Snowden	revelations.	In	general,	the	recognition	of	the	need	to	provide	judicial	oversight	is	greater	in	jurisdictions	that	view	privacy	in	the	context	of	protecting	one's	personhood.	In	this	sense,	the	level	of	procedural	safeguards	very	much	corresponds	to	the	substantive	understanding	of	the	right	to	privacy.	Limits	of	the	current	state	of	Artificial	Intelligence	for	Law	Marko	Grobelnik	Jozef	Stefan	Institute	Artificial	Intelligence	(AI),	despite	its	recent	successes	on	several	fronts,	has	still	serious	limitations	when	it	comes	to	the	problems	related	to	the	deep	understanding	the	world.	Law	is	an	area,	where	mostly	shallow	AI	probabilistic	solutions	are	not	useful.	As	a	consequence,	many	of	the	standard	routines,	where	humans	are	performing	well,	are	still	not	solvable	with	the	current	AI	techniques	and	systems.	In	the	presentation	we	will	touch	what	are	the	limits	of	the	current	AI	and	what	is	the	reason	for	them.	Recent	successes	and	popularity	of	AI	is	often	raising	expectations	what	technology	could	do	–	in	reality,	many	of	the	“impressive”	technological	solutions	are	based	on	shallow	effects	which	machine	learning	(as	a	key	today’s	AI	technology)	can	capture	from	the	big	data.	But	there	is	a	serious	problem	on	how	the	world	and	the	context	is	perceived	by	the	technology.	We	will	present	a	thin	line	between	what	AI	technology	can	do	and	what	cannot	do	based	on	current	developments	and	where	this	line	can	move	on	the	future	and	how	the	law	can	benefit	out	of	it.		
	 	 27	Living	labs	and	big	data	in	practice:	Stratumseind	2.0	-	A	discussion	of	a	living	lab	in	the	Netherlands	Masa	Galic	Tilburg	Institute	for	Law,	Technology	and	Society	(Tilburg	University)	Living	lab	projects	are	becoming	common	practice	in	(smart)	cities	around	the	world.	They	represent	a	platform	and	methodology	for	technology	testing	and	experimentation,	which	relies	on	big	data	analysis	and	increasingly	shapes	life	in	the	city.	As	a	relatively	recent	phenomenon,	however,	they	are	underresearched,	lacking	a	widely	recognised	definition	and	theoretical	framework.	The	proliferation	and	growing	importance	of	such	urban	technological	projects	demands	a	more	thorough	analysis	and	disentanglement	of	the	practice	and	the	concept.	In	order	to	address	this	need,	this	paper	first	presents	a	living	lab	in	practice	–	the	Stratumseind	Living	Lab	(part	of	the	Stratumseind	2.0	project)	in	Eindhoven,	the	Netherlands.	The	Stratumseind	Living	Lab,	a	smaller	project	in	a	middle-sized	and	upcoming	European	city,	which	includes	local	and	global	technology	companies,	serves	as	an	illustrative	example	of	a	European	living	lab,	its	operation	and	its	promises.	The	second	part	of	this	paper	examines	academic	literature	on	living	labs	and	briefly	analyzes	the	operation	of	the	Stratumseind	Living	Lab	project	in	view	of	its	promises,	particularly	those	pertaining	to	the	ideological	rhetoric	of	big	data.	Based	on	the	examination	of	theory	and	the	practical	example,	the	paper	concludes	that	such	technological	projects	carry	with	them	a	wide	range	of	social,	political,	ethical	and	legal	concerns,	which	the	parties	of	the	Stratumseind	Living	Lab	project	do	not	engage	with	seriously	enough.	The	pace	of	development	and	rollout	of	living	lab	(and	smart	city)	technologies	in	Eindhoven	and	beyond	is	proceeding	well	ahead	of	wider	reflection,	critique	and	regulation.	Such	activity	is	foolish	and	dangerous	and	does	not	lead	to	greater	effectiveness	and	legitimacy	of	the	vision.	NATO’s	New	Challenge:	Synchronizing	“Dots”,	“Bullets”	and	“Skills”	Mitko	Bogdanoski	and	Metodi	Hadji-Janev	Military	academy	“General	Mihailo	Apostolski-Skopje”		Employing	cyberspace	to	achieve	strategic	ends	via	a	hybrid	mode	of	the	warfare	state	and	non-state	actors	threaten	NATO	like	never	before.		Understanding	the	evolving	complex	threat	environment	on	14	June	2016,	NATO’s	defense	ministers	agreed	to	recognize	cyberspace	as	a	domain	at	the	upcoming	Warsaw	Summit.	During	the	Warsaw	Summit	as	an	addition	to	the	existing	operational	domains	of	air,	sea	and	land,	cyberspace	was	officially	recognized	as	a	new	operational	domain.		Although	this	decision	does	not	change	NATO’s	mission	or	mandate	it	requires	significant	diplomatic,	economic,	operational	and	informational	efforts	to	synchronize	the	“dots”,	“bullets”	and	“skills”.		There	are	three	reasons	for	this.	First,	not	all	NATO	members,	not	to	speak	partner	nations,	have	the	same	cyber	capacities.		Second,	related	to	former,	not	all	member	states	have	the	same	perception	when	it	comes	to	cyber	threats.	Third	reason	stems	from	the	operational	need.		The	article	will	first	explain	the	security	threat	landscape	that	NATO	is	facing	from	cyberspace	and	will	provide	evidences	why	NATO	and	partner	nations	need	to	consider	cyber	threats	as	a	serious	national	security	threat.	Then,	using	the	complex	system	analysis	the	article	will	explain	the	reasons	strategic,	legal	and	technical	point	of	view	for	the	main	argument	i.e.	to	synchronize	the	“dots”,	“bullets”	and	“skills”.		Particularly,	the	article	will	analyze	the	importance	of	building	cyber	defense	capacities	among	the	partner	nations.	Finally	the	article	will	provide	some	recommendation	that	need	to	be	considered	by	NATO	and	partner	nations.	
	 	 28	Personal	data	for	common	good:	how	to	profit	from	Big	Data	sustainably	Nadya	Purtova	Tilburg	Institute	for	Law,	Technology,	and	Society,	Tilburg	University	The	promises	of	Big	Data	Analytics	are	grand	and	tempting.	Access	to	the	large	pools	of	data,	much	of	which	is	personal,	is	said	to	be	vital	if	the	Big	Data	initiatives	are	to	succeed.	The	resulting	rhetoric	is	of	data	sharing.	This	talk	exposes	‘the	other	side’	of	data	sharing	which	often	remains	in	the	dark	when	the	Information	Industry	and	researchers	advocate	for	more	relaxed	rules	of	data	access	and	use:	namely,	the	talk	frames	the	issue	of	personal	data	use	in	terms	of	the	commons,	a	resource	shared	by	a	group	of	appropriators	and	therefore	subject	to	social	dilemmas	that	have	to	be	addressed	if	the	resource	use	is	to	be	sustainable.	The	talk	will	argue	that	the	uncontrolled	use	of	the	data	commons	will	ultimately	result	in	a	number	of	the	commons	problems,	and	elaborates	on	the	two	problems	in	particular:	disempowerment	of	the	individual	vis-à-vis	the	Information	Industry,	and	the	enclosure	of	data	by	a	few	Information	Industry	actors.	Personal	Data	Protection	in	Social	Sciences	in	Big	Data	Era	Janez	Štebe,	Sonja	Bezjak,	Irena	Bolko	and	Ana	Slavec	Arhiv	družboslovnih	podatkov	The	development	of	digital	technologies	fosters	new	types	of	data,	research	approaches	and	methodologies	as	well	as	significantly	increased	the	amount	of	data	interesting	for	social	sciences.	However,	it	also	raises	severe	legal,	ethical	and	quality	issues.	The	Social	Science	Data	Archives	at	the	University	of	Ljubljana	(Arhiv	družboslovnih	podatkov	-	ADP)	is	involved	in	the	SERISS	(Synergies	for	Europe’s	research	Infrastructure	in	the	Social	Sciences),	international	project	that	connects	leading	European	research	infrastructures.	In	one	of	the	tasks	the	ADP	together	with	project	partners	conducted	the	literature	review	on	how	social	media	data	(Twitter,	Facebook,	Snapchat,	etc.)	is	already	used	in	social	scientific	research	and	how	legal	and	ethical	challenges	are	discussed	in	the	field.	Based	on	20	years	of	experience	in	data	curation	and	preservation	we	identified	questions	related	to	different	phases	of	the	research	data	lifecycle.	Since	social	media	data	is	not	created	for	research	purposes,	one	of	the	main	issues	is	obtaining	participants’	informed	consent	to	reuse	data.	Consent	is	no	longer	requested	only	by	research	ethics	committees,	but	it	will	become	a	requirement	with	the	implementation	of	the	new	GDPR.	Although	social	media	data	is	often	publicly	available,	researchers	don’t	have	an	explicit	informed	consent	to	collect	and	analyse	their	data	nor	that	can	they	link	it	with	other	sources	or	reuse	it	beyond	the	original	purpose	of	data	collection.	As	a	data	archive,	ADP	is	particularly	interested	in	finding	a	legal	solution	for	data	to	be	stored,	curated	and	disseminated	in	the	long	term.	Several	questions	arise,	from	determining	data	ownership	to	time	limits	for	data	storage	and	documentation,	as	well	as	to	enable	researchers	to	link	data	from	different	provenance	(e.g.	official	statistics,	social	media	data,	historical	and	health	data).	The	research	community	needs	to	recognise	the	gap	between	research	interests	and	laws	and	ethics	policies,	and	find	a	balance	between	research	freedom	and	the	protection	of	respondents.	Pricing	(big)	data:	the	right	to	know	the	value	of	our	own	personal	data	Gianclaudio	Malgieri	Vrije	Universiteit	Brussel	-	LSTS	research	group	The	commodification	of	digital	identities	is	an	emerging	reality	in	our	Big	Data	era:	personal	data	of	individuals	have	high	value	in	the	data-driven	economy	and	are	often	considered	a	counter	performance	for	“free”	digital	services	or	for	“discounts”	in	insurances.	An	effort	that	can	increase	awareness	and	controllership	of	consumers/users	on	their	own	personal	information	could	be	making	them	aware	of	the	“price”	of	their	personal	data,	so	that	they	can	acquire	higher	awareness	about	their	power	in	the	digital	market.		
	 	 29	In	order	to	find	objective	parameters	for	quantifying	data,	we	propose	to	combine	two	methods:	a)	a	top-down	approach	(the	price	of	personal	data	“demand”),	i.e.	the	price	that	companies	generally	pay	for	personal	data	of	individuals	(turnover	from	online	ads);	and	a	b)	bottom-up	approach	(the	price	of	personal	data	supply),	based	on	a	“reverse	liability”	paradigm,	i.e.	measuring	the	“value”	of	personal	data	in	terms	of	damage	to	privacy	or	“loss	of	privacy”	and	also	in	terms	of	increase	of	consumer	asymmetry.		Secondly,	it	is	necessary	to	find	how	this	“pricing”	of	personal	data	can	be	introduced	in	the	digital	market.	We	propose	to	add	a	new	specific	duty	of	information	at	article	13	of	the	EU	General	Data	Protection	Regulation:	in	each	data	processing	where	the	value	of	customers’	personal	data	is	relevant	for	the	economic	transaction,	the	price	of	these	data	(calculated	on	objective	parameters)	should	be	communicated	to	the	consumer.		Actually,	personal	data	do	not	have	the	same	value	for	each	individual.	Subjects	having	a	lower	propensity	to	consume	and	presumably	lower	incomes	have	less	“valuable”	data	than	other	consumers	and	could	have	worse	contractual	conditions.		Accordingly,	in	order	to	avoid	discrimination	based	on	the	value	of	personal	data,	we	propose	to	include	the	propensity	to	consume	and	the	economic	conditions	of	data	subjects	within	the	“special	categories	of	data”	at	Art.	9	GDPR.	Protecting	Individual	Rights	With	Basic	Tools	in	the	High-Tech	Era	Sorina	Ioana	Doroga	West	University	of	Timisoara	In	the	era	of	ever-expanding	digital	markets	and	surprising	advancements	in	technology,	it	is	hardly	surprising	that	law	seems,	at	times,	unable	to	keep	up.	With	the	increasing	use	of	big	data	in	a	large	number	of	sectors	–	both	in	the	private,	as	well	as	in	the	governmental	sphere	–	most	transactions	and	operations	take	place	in	the	absence	of	the	concerned	individuals	whose	data	is	actually	being	collected	and	processed.	This	raises	issues	relating	not	only	to	the	insufficiency	(or	rather,	inadequacy)	of	big	data	regulation,	but	also	to	the	effectiveness	of	existing	mechanisms	of	legal	protection	for	data	subjects.	The	present	paper	deals	with	concerns	relating	to	the	protection	of	individual	rights	in	the	context	of	data	processing,	by	tackling	the	issues	of	informed	consent,	as	well	as	effective	remedies	available	to	data	subjects	under	international	human	rights	instruments.	While	it	is	acknowledged	that	specific	rules	available	at	national	and	EU	level	might	prove	at	times	to	be	insufficiently	precise	(or	flexible,	in	some	cases)	so	as	to	offer	effective	protection	of	rights	such	as	privacy	or	freedom	of	expression	of	data	subjects,	we	attempt	to	look	back	at	the	core	principles	under	human	rights	instruments,	which	could	be	employed	in	order	to	cover	existing	regulatory	gaps.	To	this	end,	a	comparative	analysis	of	the	EU	and	US	case-law	concerning	the	interaction	of	big	data	with	privacy	and	expression	rights	provides	a	useful	tool	in	identifying	the	legal	standards	that	could	help	strike	a	fair	balance	between	the	legitimate	interests	in	the	use	of	data	and	the	protection	of	individual	freedoms.	The	specificities	of	the	interplay	between	the	right	to	privacy	and	the	freedom	of	expression	in	the	European	and	US	legal	cultures	also	create	a	fertile	ground	for	identifying	potential	solutions	for	improving	existing	data	regulations.	Reconfiguring	freedom:	Big	data,	the	Investigatory	Powers	Act	2016	and	the	construction	of	liberty	in	the	UK’s	security	state.	Lydia	Morgan	University	of	Birmingham	The	UK’s	Investigatory	Powers	Act	2016	puts	a	number	of	troubling	powers	on	statutory	footing	and	expands	other	already	existing	powers	under	the	guise	of	legislative	rationalisation.	One	of	the	principles	at	its	core	is	a	preventative	rather	than	punitive	approach	terrorism	and	serious	crime	supported	by	the	idea	of	security	as	
	 	 30	central	to	the	national	interest.	Big	data	is	gathered	by	and	on	behalf	of	the	state	and	utilised	to	monitor,	predict	and	prosecute	preparatory	activities.	In	so	doing,	a	variety	of	forms	of	freedom	are	curtailed.	This	paper	explores	the	ways	in	which	this	reconfigures	the	idea	of	freedom	in	the	21st	century,	blending	approaches	from	public	law	and	political	theory.	It	suggests	security	is	now	privileged	over	freedom	rather	than	being	sought	to	pursue	it.	This	unnecessarily	restricts	even	negative	liberty	and	has	little	recognition	of	the	impact	on	autonomy	and	agency.	Slave	to	the	Algo-rhythm?	Legal	and	technological	sticking	points	concerning	machine	learning	and	the	GDPR	Lilian	Edwards	and	Michael	Veale	Strathclyde	University,	UCL	More	machine	learning	algorithm–powered	systems	are	deployed	each	day	in	areas	that	now	include	employment,	policing,	marketing,	price	discrimination,	health	intervention,	online	news	curation,	tax	fraud	prediction	and	child	protection.	Some	welcome	this	trend	of	data-driven	decision-making	and	decision-support,	while	others	worry	that	the	opacity	and	perceived	objectivity	of	such	systems	usher	in	unwanted	biases	through	the	back	door	at	the	same	time	as	they	kick	due	process	out.	The	GDPR	offers	a	range	of	rights	—some	new,	some	simply	rehashed	—	that	many	hope	will	help	them	navigate	this	new	algorithmic	governance	society	in	the	courts.	Yet	as	this	paper	will	discuss,	when	considering	the	GDPR	in	the	context	of	machine	learning	using	both	a	legal	and	a	computer	science	lens	these	rights	do	not	appear	straightforward	to	understand	or	implement.		An	alleged	new	“right	to	an	explanation”	(art	13)—which	has	actually	existed	in	similar	form	in	the	DPD	since	1995	—has	both	legal	and	technical	caveats.	Legally,	there	has	always	been	a	carve	out	from	the	right	for	the	protection	of	trade	secrets	and	intellectual	property,	which	probably	explains	its	lack	of	historical	use	in	the	EU.	Recital	63	of	the	GDPR	does	however	now	counsel	that	this	should	not	justify	“a	refusal	to	provide	all	information	to	the	data	subject”	[emphasis	added].		Providing	“meaningful	information	about	the	logic”	of	advanced	machine	learning	models	is	rarely	technically	possible.	The	main	techniques	proposed	today	by	computer	scientists	to	effectively	‘explain’	neural	networks,	their	innards	black-boxed	even	to	their	designers,	wrap	simpler	models	optimised	for	an	explanation	around	more	complex	ones	to	estimate	core	logics:	so-called	‘pedagogical	interpretation’.	Yet	such	simple	models	are	just	that—simple—therefore	often	failing	to	‘explain’	the	fringe	cases	that	are	the	most	likely	to	lead	individuals	to	call	upon	their	GDPR	rights.		The	right	to	not	be	subject	to	algorithmic	decision-making	(art	22)	–	again	not	new	but	extended	from	an	earlier	right	in	the	DPD,	art	15	–	seems	promising,	but	is	replete	with	exemptions	and	only	valid	(a)	in	cases	of	automated	processing	producing	legal	or	similar	significant	effects	and	(b)	where	the	effect	was	solely	based	on	automated	processing.	Machine	learning	in	high-stakes	contexts	is	almost	always	deployed	as	decision-support	rather	than	purely	automated	decision-making	and	the	GDPR	lacks	the	nuances	necessary	to	establish	whether	a	human	was	seriously	‘in-the-loop’.		Similar	issues	arise	around	existing	rights	to	a	“right	to	data	portability”	(art	20)	,deletion	and	“to	be	forgotten”	(erasure,	art	17)	with	problems	also	foreseeable	given	the	ongoing	debate	on	when	personal	data	ceases	to	be	so	by	virtue	of	anonymization/pseudonymisation.	.	What	right	does	a	data	subject	have	to	these	in	respect	of	inferred	data?		We	conclude	by	asking	if	we	are	all	condemned	to	be	slaves	to	the	algo-rhythm?	
	 	 31	Slovenian	criminal	intelligence	activity	and	protection	of	privacy	Sabina	Zgaga	Constitutional	Court	of	the	Republic	of	Slovenia	Recently	tendency	could	be	noticed	that	the	intelligence	powers	of	not	only	national	intelligence	and	security	agencies,	but	that	of	regular	police	should	be	empowered,	also	with	intent	to	gather	evidence	for	subsequent	criminal	prosecution.	This	trend	could	be	recognised	also	in	Slovenia.	It	is	connected	to	data	mining,	since	the	police	intelligence	activity	includes	the	acquisition,	assessment	and	analysis	of	personal	and	other	data	about	criminal	activity	of	natural	and	legal	persons	and	criminal	associations	according	to	police	legislation.	Based	on	this,	the	process	of	decision-making	and	planning	of	police	activity	regarding	crime	prevention,	detection	and	investigation	should	be	made.	In	this	framework,	the	Police	can	gather	information	from	all	public	sources	and	with	cooperation	of	persons,	who	voluntarily	give	the	police	operational	information	about	criminal	acts,	perpetrators	and	other	relevant	activities.	This	increased	police	intelligence	activity	of	course	opens	up	also	numerous	legal	issues	and	question.	From	the	viewpoint	of	compatibility	of	with	Criminal	Procedure	Act	it	is	also	of	great	significance,	when	this	intelligence	activity	transforms	into	criminal	procedure,	in	which	stronger	encroachments	of	privacy	are	allowed,	but	in	which	also	the	status	of	a	suspect	carries	certain	legal	protection.	And	last,	but	not	least;	it	is	essential,	whether	the	police	is	allowed	to	use	its	own	-	already	existing	-	official	records	of	personal	data,	or	even	the	official	records	of	personal	data,	kept	by	other	state	authorities,	since	the	Slovenian	personal	data	protection	is	relatively	strict.	This	paper	therefore	explores	data	mining,	conducted	by	the	Police	during	its	intelligence	police	activity	in	Slovenia,	and	its	legal	limits.	Social	network,	social	profiling,	predictive	policing.	Current	issues	and	future	perspectives	Federico	Costantini	Università	degli	Studi	di	Udine	Network	analysis	is	a	powerful	tool	that	is	increasingly	used	not	only	to	determine	events	that	occurred	in	the	past,	but	also	to	predict	what	may	happen	in	the	future.	This	contribute	will	discuss	the	perspective,	far	from	being	abstract	or	remote,	that	such	methods	may	be	adopted	in	order	to	anticipate	crimes.	Taking	into	account	current	technologies,	present	legal	science	and	according	to	the	recent	“Onlife	Manifesto”,	here	are	tackled	three	issues,	concerning	respectively	the	epistemological,	the	legal-philosophical	and	the	anthropological	aspect.	In	the	first	place,	the	relevance	of	the	information	provided	in	a	crime’s	“prediction”,	since	it	does	not	concern	an	event	of	the	past.	Secondly,	the	nature	of	responsibility	ascribed	on	these	grounds,	as	neither	an	“actus	reo”	nor	a	“mens	rea”	can	be	found	in	the	case.	Finally,	the	kind	of	punishment	could	be	given	to	the	supposed	criminal,	because	free	will	should	be	doubted	if	his	behaviour	could	be	foreseen.	State’s	Due	Diligence	in	Cyberspace	in	the	Era	of	Big	Data	Vasilka	Sancin	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	Due	diligence	under	international	law	explains	what	a	responsible	State	ought	to	do	under	normal	conditions	in	a	situation	with	its	best	practicable	and	available	means,	with	a	view	to	fulfilling	its	international	obligation,	and	thus	refers	to	a	level	of	judgement,	care,	prudence	and,	determination	that	a	State	would	reasonably	be	expected	to	undertake	under	particular	circumstances.	The	author	aims	to	discuss	States'	due	diligence	in	cyberspace	in	the	era	of	big	data	through	the	three-fold	obligation	of	States:	to	prevent,	to	investigate	and	to	prosecute	those	responsible	for	cyber	attacks.	The	analysis	delves	upon	the	paradigm	shift	in	interpreting	State's	sovereignty	in	cyberspace.	Some	of	the	well-established	principles	in	certain	areas	of	international	law,	
	 	 32	such	as	due	diligence	in	international	environmental	law	relating	to	prevention	of	transboundary	harm,	are	used	mutatis	mutandis	as	guiding	principles	for	the	application	of	due	diligence	in	cyberspace.	In	discussing	the	contents	of	due	diligence	in	cyberspace	emphasis	is	given	to	the	dilemmas	surrounding	the	issues	of	threshold	of	emerging	damage	from	the	attack,	actual	and	constructive	knowledge	of	the	state	and	possible	measures	that	a	State	can	take	in	response	to	a	cyber	attack.	The	alluring	promise	of	objectivity:	Big	data	in	criminal	justice	Mojca	Plesničar	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Criminal	justice	systems	have	long	aimed	at	preventing	judges’	subjectivity	from	having	any	impact	on	in	the	courtroom.	A	good,	yet	complex	example	is	the	case	of	sentencing,	where	an	example	of	trying	to	minimise	judges’	subjectivity	are	the	infamous	sentencing	grids,	used	by	different	USA	jurisdictions,	which	have	entered	the	sentencing	stage	promising	to	limit	judicial	discretion	thus	eliminating	judges’	subjectivity	and	consequently	sentencing	disparity.	To	say	the	promise	was	not	quite	kept	is	an	understatement.	Other	systems,	relying	on	less	detailed	guidelines	or	statutory	regulation	have	left	more	room	for	the	individualisation	of	sentences,	but	in	parallel	for	subjectivity	as	well.		A	modern	option	to	tackle	the	issue	has	emerged	with	the	developments	in	processing	big	data.	Big	data	has	so	far	entered	criminal	justice	at	three	levels:	bail,	sentencing,	and	parole.	They	all	utilise	a	large	amount	of	previously	decided	cases	to	build	a	strong	algorithm	able	to	predict	the	best	possible	answer	to	the	given	question	in	a	specific	case.	The	outcomes	they	offer	are	data-driven	probabilities	of	requested	instances.		The	clear	answers	such	algorithms	are	able	to	produce	are	very	alluring.	They	bring	promises	of	a	fairer	system:	informed	decisions	devoid	of	bias	and	any	kind	of	subjectivity.	There	are	many	potential	benefits	of	bringing	together	technological	accuracy	and	human	empathy:	such	decisions	could	be	much	more	accurate	and	based	on	a	sound	analysis	of	predictive	factors.	Seen	as	more	objective,	such	algorithms	could	instil	the	long-lost	trust	of	the	public	in	the	fairness	of	the	criminal	justice	system.	Moreover,	they	may	present	an	opportunity	to	purposefully	re-shape	the	penal	system	in	order	to	reflect	progressive	values	and	support	a	more	humane	outlook.		However,	there	are	some	important	considerations	to	be	made	before	embarking	on	the	big-data-saviour-of-justice	wagon	which	we	will	discuss	in	detail.	We	don’t	know	what	the	Questions	are,	but	we	know	we're	gonna	find	the	Answers	Alexander	Czadilek,	Christof	Tschohl	and	Walter	Hötzendorfer		epicenter.works,	Research	Institute	Vienna	Big	Data	has	been	discussed	in	the	Data	Protection	Law	community	for	several	years	now.	However,	the	big	questions	still	remain.	In	this	paper,	we	discuss	some	of	these	questions.	We	strongly	belief	that	data	protection	is	not	an	end	in	itself	but	a	catalyst	to	achieve	more	fundamental	aims.	Therefore,	we	will	start	from	a	fundamental	(and	fundamental	rights)	perspective,	asking	what	the	protective	purpose	of	Data	Protection	Law	actually	is	and	what	that	means	for	Big	Data.	We	will	then	delve	into	the	new	legislative	acts	of	EU	Data	Protection	Law,	the	General	Data	Protection	Regulation	(Regulation	(EU)	2016/679,	GDPR)	and	the	Police	and	Criminal	Justice	Authorities	Directive	(Directive	(EU)	2016/680)	to	analyse	their	implications	on	the	use	of	Big	Data.	A	key	point	here	is	the	principle	of	purpose	limitation	and	the	new	rules	on	further	processing	for	compatible	purposes	(Art.	5(1)(b)	and	Art.	6(4)	GDPR).		
	 	 33	Another	important	issue	is	profiling	and	automated	decision	making	for	law	enforcement,	criminal	justice	and	other	purposes	based	on	Big	Data.	Here,	not	only	legal	aspects	but	also	the	implications	of	factual	psychological	mechanisms	have	to	be	considered,	such	as	an	over-confident	belief	in	the	results	calculated	by	software	systems	(“machines”).	It	must	also	be	considered	whether	results,	with	both	negative	and	positive	consequences	for	a	suspect,	are	taken	up	(principle	of	material	truth).		Finally,	we	ask,	whether	and	how	the	problems	we	described	can	be	resolved.	In	our	view,	Privacy	by	Design	will	play	a	major	role.	Based	on	our	experience	both	in	research	projects	and	commercial	projects	we	show	some	practical	examples.	
	 	 34	About	the	Venue		Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	Poljanski	nasip	2	SI-1000	Ljubljana		The	Faculty	of	Law	is	situated	in	the	center	of	Ljubljana,	by	the	Dragon	Bridge	over	river	Ljubljanica.	Location	on	the	map	of	the	city		Link	to	the	official	web-site	of	the	Faculty	of	Law:	W:	http://www.pf.uni-lj.si/en/		The	organizing	institutions:	Institute	of	Criminology	at	the	Faculty	of	Law	Ljubljana	and	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	Poljanski	nasip	2,	1000	Ljubljana,	Slovenia		W:	http://inst-krim.si/en/		On	behalf	of	the	organizer:	Associate	Prof.	Dr.	Aleš	Završnik		The	city			Ljubljana	is	the	lovely	capital	of	Slovenia.	The	charming	city	covers	a	surface	area	of	275	km2	and	has	a	population	of	about	276,000.	The	city	centre,	abundant	in	cultural	and	architectural	pearls	can	be	explored	by	feet	and	the	variety	of	pubs,	bars	and	restaurants	by	the	banks	of	the	river	Ljubljanica	offer	a	pleasant	experience	at	the	end	of	the	day.			For	information	on	Ljubljana	you	may	check	the	following:	http://www.ljubljana.info/	http://www.ljubljana-calling.com/ENG/index.asp			Slovenia		Slovenia	is	a	young	European	country	with	the	population	of	almost	two	million.	In	spite	of	its	size	it	offers	a	mixture	of	geographical	and	cultural	features,	from	the	sunny	Alps	to	the	green	Mediterranean,	from	the	Pannonian	fields	to	the	Karst	stones.	Because	of	its	size	they	are	all	within	your	arm’s	reach.	For	information	on	Slovenia,	please	refer	to	the	following	web-sites:	http://www.slovenia.info/		http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slovenia		
	 	 35	Map	of	the	Building	of	the	Faculty	of	Law		 			 
	 	 36	VENUE:	Faculty	of	Law	in	Ljubljana		(Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana,	Poljanski	nasip	2,	1000	Ljubljana,	Slovenia)		 		The	Faculty	of	Law,	established	in	1919,	is	one	of	the	founding	faculties	of	the	University	of	Ljubljana	and	the	largest	law	faculty	in	Slovenia.		Ever	since,	the	Faculty	has	offered	its	students	an	intellectually	exciting	learning	environment	with	high	academic	standards	at	undergraduate	and	postgraduate	levels,	promoting	both	legal	knowledge	and	critical	thought.	Today,	it	is	not	only	the	oldest	but	also	the	largest	and	–	by	any	measure	–	the	best	law	faculty	in	Slovenia.	The	Faculty	boasts	a	large	teaching	staff	working	in	nine	departments,	six	further	associated	research	institutes	and	the	most	extensive	law	library	in	the	region.	Graduates	of	the	Ljubljana	Faculty	of	Law	go	on	to	assume	important	positions	in	society	and	shape	the	Slovenian	legal	system	and	practice,	but	the	Faculty	also	nurtures	its	international	outlook	and	reputation.	This	is	shown	not	only	in	the	European,	comparative	and	international	focus	embodied	in	study	programmes,	but	also	in	the	high	mobility	of	students	and	teaching	staff,	frequent	visiting	lecturers	and	other	distinguished	guests,	successful	participation	in	international	student	competitions	and	a	growing	portfolio	of	international	conferences	and	similar	events	taking	place	at	the	Faculty.							 
	 	 37	Venue:	Faculty	of	Law,	University	of	Ljubljana	location		 	The	conference	will	take	place	in	the	seminars	and	lecture	rooms	at	the	ground	floor	of	the	Faculty	of	Law.	There	will	be	indications	at	the	entrance	of	the	Faculty	to	indicate	way	for	participants.	WIFI	access		Free	WIFI	will	be	available	to	all	participants	of	the	Big	data:	New	Challenges	for	Law	and	Ethics	conference.	All	necessary	information	on	this	will	be	provided	for	when	participants	arrive	to	the	venue.	EDUROAM	network	is	available.	Cafeteria	The	organisers	will	provide	for	coffee	breaks	for	the	participants	during	breaks.	The	Faculty	cafeteria	is	also	available	to	participants,	it	is	open	from	8	am	to	15	pm.	There	are	also	shops	(e.g.	Spar)	nearby	Faculty	where	participants	will	be	able	to	purchase	their	own	food.		Contact	Information	For	any	further	information	write	to	inst.crim@pf.uni-lj.si	.	 
	 	 38	HOST	CITY:	Ljubljana		 	(Source:	http://www.ljubljana.guide/how-to-travel/travel-to-ljubljana/)		Ljubljana,	the	capital	of	Slovenia,	is	the	political	and	cultural	heart	of	the	Slovenian	nation.	It	is	classified	as	a	mid-sized	European	city,	but	has	preserved	its	small-town	friendliness	and	relaxed	atmosphere	while	providing	all	the	facilities	of	a	modern	capital.	Ljubljana	is	a	unique	city	dotted	with	pleasant	picturesque	places	where	you	can	expect	all	kinds	of	nice	little	surprises.	It	is	an	important	European	commercial,	business,	exhibition	and	congressional	centre	as	well	as	the	transport,	science	and	education	centre	of	Slovenia.		Whether	you're	taking	a	stroll	down	the	Congress	square	or	alongside	riverbanks	you	can	feel	and	see	the	atmosphere	that	surrounds	the	beautiful	but	yet	small	city	centre.	Today	scientists	are	drawn	to	the	city	because	of	its	high-calibre	institutes	and	university,	of	which	especially	law	school	and	medical	school	are	a	top	pick	in	the	region,	as	are	artists	due	to	its	world-famous	graphic	biennial,	art	academy	and	countless	art	galleries.	International	businessmen,	economists	and	experts	from	all	fields	frequently	attend	the	city's	many	business	and	congressional	meetings,	exhibitions	and	trade	fairs.		Ljubljana	is	also	a	city	of	culture.	It	is	home	to	numerous	theatres,	museums	and	galleries,	and	hosts	one	of	the	oldest	philharmonic	orchestras	in	the	world.	For	the	people	of	Ljubljana,	culture	is	a	way	of	living.	Over	10,000	cultural	events	take	place	in	the	city	every	year,	among	which	there	are	10	international	festivals.		For	further	information	please	visit:	https://www.visitljubljana.com/en/visitors/	 
	 	 39	OTHER	IMPORTANT	INFORMATION		Currency	Slovenia	is	a	European	Union	member	state	therefore	the	official	currency	is	the	euro	(€).	It	was	introduced	at	the	beginning	of	2007.	Most	shops	across	the	country	accept	international	credit	and	debit	cards.	Slovenia	has	a	widespread	cash	machine	network.		Medical	Assistance		Pharmacies:	In	case	of	minor	health	problems	such	as	colds,	headaches,	temperature	above	normal,	and	insect	bites,	medicines	can	be	obtained	from	pharmacies	also	without	a	prescription.	There	are	numerous	pharmacies	in	Ljubljana,	which	are	open	from	8.00	am	until	19.00	pm.	The	Lekarna	pri	Polikliniki	duty	pharmacy	is	open	24	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week	(Address:	Njegoševa	cesta	6k,	1000	Ljubljana,	tel.:	+386	(0)1	230	61	00).		Emergency	medical	services:			• For	rescue	and	emergency	services,	call	the	free	phone	number	112.	• 24-hour	emergency	GP	services	for	adults	are	provided	by	the	Emergency	Unit	of	the	Ljubljana	University	Medical	Centre,	entrance	from	the	Bohoričeva	ulica	street,	1000	Ljubljana.			
	 	 40	Notes		
	 	 41			
	 	 42			
	 	 43			
	 	 44			
	 	 45			
	 	 46			
	 	 47			
	 	 48		
