Intel’s AI Privacy Policy  White Paper Protecting individuals’ privacy and data   in the artificial intelligence world 
Authors: David Hoffman   Associate General  Counsel and Global  Privacy Officer Riccardo Masucci   Global Director of  Privacy Policy ©2018, Intel Corporation 1
Two Technology Trends   At Intel, we believe in the enormous potential of artificial intelligence (AI) to improve people’s  lives. Two trends that are influencing AI and digital developments globally are: 1. Data analytics  from the edge to the cloud , and 2. Increased mechanisms for data collection and creation .  Five Foundational Observations on AI and Privacy AI represents a new privacy territory as it entails autonomous determinations that potentially  affect citizens. The following observations shape privacy’s impact on AI:  a) Increased automation should not translate to less privacy protection;  b) Explainability needs more accountability;  c) Ethical data processing is built on privacy;  d) Privacy protects who we are (how others see us and how we see ourselves);  e) Encryption and de-identification help address privacy in AI. Six Policy Recommendations 1 2 5 64New legislative and regulatory initiatives should be comprehensive, technology  neutral, and support the free flow of data:  horizontal legislation can encompass  both data uses and technologies that fall outside existing sectoral laws and that are  still unforeseen. Organizations should embrace risk-based accountability approaches , putting  in place technical (privacy-by-design) or organizational measures (product  development lifecycles and ethics review boards) to minimize privacy risks in AI.  Funding research in security is essential to protect privacy:  in areas like  homomorphic encryption, access to personal data can be minimised and protection  enhanced. It takes data to protect data:  to detect biases or cyber threats and to protect  personal data, AI needs to process personal data. Governments should promote access to data , for example, opening up  government data, supporting the creation of reliable datasets available to all,  fostering incentives for data sharing, investing in the development of voluntary  international standards (i.e. for algorithmic explainability) and promoting diversity  in datasets.Automated decision making should be fostered while augmenting with  safeguards to protect individuals: legitimate interest should be acknowledged  as legal basis for data processing for AI. Industry and governments should work  together on algorithm explainability and risk-based degrees of human oversight to  minimize potential adverse impacts for citizens from automated decision-making.3Executive Summary 2
I. Two Technology Trends Artificial intelligence (AI) has gained prominence in  the public debate due to the tremendous potential of  its applications.1 Innovation across the digital society  we live in is astounding: autonomous technologies  are deployed for new life-enhancing and potentially  life-saving uses such as disease detection, precision  medicine, driving assistance, increased productivity,  safety at work and to make education more accessible. These advancements can be achieved thanks to  increased computing capability that supports complex  algorithms to extract meaningful information from  ever-bigger datasets. Compute power and data are the  enablers of artificial intelligence. Data represents the  fabric of our contemporary world and its quantity has  grown exponentially over the past few years. Some  estimated that every day 2.5 quintillion bytes of new  data are produced, and more surprisingly, 90% of all  available data was produced after 2015.2 In such a data-intensive society, two trends will affect  future developments: 1) Edge to cloud data analytics:  E s s e n t i a l  b u i l d i n g  blocks of the environment described above are  data centres and networks that serve millions of  connected “edge devices”, from smart homes and  factories, to autonomous cars and drones. These  endpoints leverage increasing capabilities in  connectivity (such as future 5G communications)  and computing power to carry out analytical  workloads to extrapolate value from datasets.  Data processing and analytics happen across the  infrastructure, at the edge, on the network and in  the data centre.  2) Increased mechanisms for data collection  and creation:  Personal data is not just collected  from individuals who provide it for particular  uses, but also observed and gathered by sensors  in connected devices, and derived or created  through further automated processing.3 In fact, the  percentage of data coming directly from individuals  is decreasing compared to the information that is  collected in our increasingly connected society and  inferred through machine learning technologies.4The unprecedented opportunities linked to  development and adoption of AI-based solutions  are drawing policymakers’ and regulators’ attention  to implications for citizens and society, as well as  to possible actions that governments and national  authorities can take. Privacy and data protection  represent a key component of these implications  and possible government actions. The interest in AI is  growing across the world and many major economies  have defined or are in the process of shaping their  national AI strategies. II. Five  Foundational Observations on  AI and Privacy Due in large part to those two trends, increasingly  autonomous and ubiquitous technologies take  advantage of large datasets and data from multiple  sources to make autonomous determinations  in nearreal time. In some cases (i.e. banking, human resources,  transportation), these decisions may affect individuals,  their private lives, their physical safety, their position  in society, and their interaction with others. It is  important for governments to analyze the impact of  this automated decision making on privacy. The existence of potential harm for individuals resulting  from autonomous determinations (e.g. discrimination  and restriction of choices and possibilities) will create  a number of unique situations that public and private  organisations will have to deal with when shaping their  privacy policies and strategies. Below we describe five  observations which inform and inspire our work on AI  and Privacy. a. Increased automation should not translate to  less privacy protection. The OECD Fair Information Practice Principles (FIPPs)  have inspired lawmaking in the field of privacy and  data protection for the past forty years.5 Intel’s call to  policymakers and industry to “Rethink Privacy”6 is valid  now more than ever due to the increasing pressure to  which those principles (“the global common language  of data protection”) are subject. The FIPPs have  managed to adapt to technology changes and still  INTEL ’S AI PRIVACY POLICY WHITE PAPER Protecting individuals’ privacy and data in the artificial intelligence world 3
provide valuable guidance because they reflect longheld, widely-accepted values about the individual’s  relationship with personal data and organizations’  responsibility to protect that data. At Intel we believe  that the FIPPs should be seen as a system of levers to  be pulled and adjusted to provide the best protection  possible in the context of a particular data application.7  When certain FIPPs are less helpful, such as Purpose  Specification and Collection Limitation, more  investment may be necessary in other FIPPs.  With  regard to AI, heightened focus should be placed on the  FIPPs of Security Safeguards and Accountability.  b. Explainability needs more accountability. Automated determinations will have an impact  on people’s lives and their possibility of selfdetermination. Deep learning techniques (broadly  deployed today for applications like computer vision,  natural language processing or facial recognition)  use large datasets to iteratively train multi-layered  neural networks - a process inspired by the human  brain. The complexity and abstraction of these  tasks lead to situations where the factors driving  the results of the algorithms are hard to understand  and therefore explain. The principle of transparency   will be challenged because the logic involved in the  decision making will be difficult to discern. While  some academics assume the implicit existence of a  “right to explanation” in the EU GDPR8, organisations  implementing AI solutions should be able to  demonstrate that they have the right processes,  policies and resources in place to minimize privacy  risks and adverse impacts to the individual. Responsible risk management practices require that  organisations hold themselves accountable to put  in place appropriate technical and organisational  measures for addressing privacy and data protection  concerns of customers, business partners and  society. Accountability  starts with the organisation’s  commitment to create tools and training to implement  privacy, to promote systems for internal oversight  and external verification, and to ensure means for  remediation and enforcement.9 Privacy-by-design   approaches, that embed privacy impact assessments  throughout the design and production process, are a good example of accountability and should apply  across the AI ecosystem. c. Ethical data processing is built on privacy. Intel has long promoted the innovative and ethical data  use for the transformative positive impact it can make  on the lives of individuals. The continued evolution  of our digital society coincides with a series of sociocultural shifts, such as from human autonomy to the  convergence between human and machines. Similarly,  traditional values such as dignity, freedom, democracy,  equality, autonomy, and justice are part of discussions  around digital ethics.10 Privacy and data protection  today represent intrinsic and foundational concepts for  our modern society, which enable individual freedom  of choice and user control. Protecting individuals and  their data goes beyond legal compliance requirements:  it means embracing societal values and working to  build a much-needed trust in the technologies and  their positive impact on people. d. Privacy is protecting who we are. Privacy requires that data is both reliable and that it will  not be used to harm individuals. Privacy aims to prevent  unauthorised access, modification and loss of personal  data. It requires a respect for private and family life,  home and confidentiality of communications. Artificial  intelligence techniques and their potential to create  data such as images, videos, and sounds are moving  the debate away from the pure risk of identification  or unauthorized processing of personal identifiable  information. Artificial intelligence is increasing the risks  to individuals in two specific ways that impact 1. how  others see us, and 2. how we see ourselves. How others see us : artificial intelligence may  manipulate individuals and their reality, creating false  information, such as false physical or psychological  projections of people. Safeguarding truthfulness of  personal data entails the right of citizens to control  the use of their name, image or aspect of their identity  (personality rights). AI could increase the ability to   create false information  about individuals that is  increasingly believable by others and can impact  the way a person is perceived and treated. For these  reasons, maintaining the authenticity of personhood  4
represents a key privacy priority for our society. How we see ourselves: artificial intelligence techniques  boost the ability to perform accurate profiling of  people and to extract meaningful insights about them,  with unprecedented degrees of depth. Organisations  may end up knowing or predicting individuals’  behaviours better than people know themselves.  Some ill-intentioned organizations and governments  could take advantage of this ability, targeting citizens  and change their view of reality. This could lead to a  “programmable citizen” scenario, where inappropriate  use of AI can influence individuals’ choices (for  example, for electoral purposes through fake news) or  modify what groups they identify with (for example, for  control and surveillance purposes in non-democratic  regimes). e. Stronger encryption and de-identification help  address privacy. Data confidentiality, integrity and accuracy have  been key objectives of cybersecurity practices for  decades and have been contemplated in all privacy  legal frameworks. With the increasing amount of  data collected, processed and inferred in the artificial  intelligence space, strong encryption and deidentification (full anonymization) techniques serve  the purpose of protecting individuals’ privacy while  achieving higher levels of security. Achieving deidentification will require increasingly complex practices,  because re-identification will be increasingly possible  in a deep learning-driven environment.  Differential  privacy  techniques have emerged in the last years  as viable solutions to minimise privacy risks, adding  “noise” to scramble personal data.11 In the academic  and research community, homomorphic encryption  seems particularly promising as it allows computation  on encrypted data, therefore enabling AI tasks  without the need to transfer personal information.12 III. Six Policy Recommendations This paper aims at informing and contributing to  Intel’s ongoing engagement with policymakers and  regulators to find effective solutions to address  privacy concerns. Intel works at developing “edgeto-cloud” hardware and software solutions that will  enable artificial intelligence to realize its potential  for improving the lives of people. At the same time,  Intel is committed to allow citizens to benefit from  these innovative data uses, while trusting that their  data is processed in ethical, protected and privacypreserving ways. 1. New legislative and regulatory initiatives  should be comprehensive, technology neutral  and should enable the free flow of data. To address the complexity of our digital society and  keep up with the pace of technology advances, privacy  legislation should be  c o m p r e h e n s i v e  to avoid legal  loopholes and to cover both data uses and technologies  that currently either fall outside existing sectoral laws or  that are still unforeseen. AI-specific privacy laws might  not ensure enough flexibility to pass the test of time.  Instead, comprehensive, horizontal legislation should  be based on the FIPPs with flexibility provided to  increase protections from certain FIPPs when others are  not sufficiently protective of individuals’ privacy. FIPPs  such as Purpose Specification, Collection Limitation,  and Openness will be challenged by autonomous  technologies; therefore, any proposed law should focus  on effective solutions allowing for security safeguards,  individual participation, and increased accountability  of organizations. The history of the FIPPs - which has  inspired privacy legislation around the world - shows  how long standing principles have been and can be  used and reinterpreted according to technological  advancements to create  technology neutral  laws. In addition, the ability to process data and move it across  borders is critical to developing new technologies.  The global value of digital data flows has grown  exponentially over the past decade and accounts for  several trillions of dollars of the global GDP.13 Legislative  initiatives should, therefore, promote unencumbered  cross border data flows under appropriate safeguards INTEL ’S AI PRIVACY POLICY WHITE PAPER Protecting individuals’ privacy and data in the artificial intelligence world 5
for individuals. At the same time, we acknowledge that  governments may have a number of legitimate reasons  to require the storing of a copy of the data within their  country. Defining those situations, would not prevent  policymakers from supporting the protected free flow  of data  and limit data localisation requirements. 2. Organizations should embrace risk-based  accountability approaches Accountability  can be described as the ability of  responsible organisations to demonstrate that  appropriate measures have been put in place to  minimize privacy and security risks. These technical  or organizational measures should be tailored based  on each business’ needs as well as the specific  risks associated to the data processing performed.  Consequently, regulators could deem accountability  measures as a proof of legal compliance or at least a  mitigating factor in case of a data breach.   From a technical perspective, embedding privacy  in the development of AI solutions ( privacy-bydesign ) is possible. For example, anonymous video  analytics software can extract information, store it  as a log file and discard the images. Image blurring  of faces or car plates minimize the risk of linking  identifiers to individuals. Development of voluntary  international standards to guide common privacy-bydesign approaches could enable consistency across  multiple jurisdictions. In addition, de-identification  and encryption  practices have proved effective in  addressing privacy and security concerns, because  they still enable computational tasks without exposing  data to unauthorised access, modification, loss or  deletion. These practices are crucial in the health care  sector where medical information represents sensitive  data that, if misused, could harm patients or subject  them to discrimination.  Responsible companies have developed product  development lifecycles , which include impact  assessments and balancing tests to measure privacy  and security risks of artificial intelligence-based  technologies. These assessments are the means  by which accountable organizations can deliver  on privacy-by-design. Throughout the production process, from design to market release, engineers and  analysts evaluate at each step potential unintended  consequences for end users, and suggest additional  features or alternative organisational solutions to  minimise those risks. For example, researchers may  adapt their data management practices, until they  understand the implications of that specific use of  the data; they may segment or cut out information  before passing it on to other data scientists; they may  store data in few highly secured locations with access  restricted to a small group of users.    Accountable organizations also need governance  structures over these design processes. Privacyconscious and ethical use of data has become a priority  also for senior management in organisations. Future  technology scenarios are increasingly discussed within  ethics councils or ethical review boards established  by organizations to address ethical issues inherent  to products that are essential to build and reinforce  citizens’ trust..  Intel has already taken significant steps towards all  the above-mentioned measures and firmly believes  that industry across the board should embrace similar  approaches. 3. Automated decision-making should be  fostered while augmenting with safeguards to  protect individuals. The “notice and consent” model has attempted to  provide for the FIPP of Individual Participation for  decades. It has been a valuable tool to empower  citizens and give them control over data, but has  always had limited effect due to the tremendous  burden it places on individuals to fully understand  how information that relates to them is collected,  processed and used. The ever-changing technology  environment shows that the use of notice and consent  will increasingly be difficult in many data collection  and creation contexts, hence other legal bases should  be considered as lawful grounds for processing. The  legitimate interest  of the entity processing personal  data (controller or processor) should be balanced  against the legitimate expectations of the individuals  (data subjects). Well-identified legitimate interests  6
such as the physical safety of individuals or network  and information security should supplement consent  where appropriate. Legitimate interest can serve as an  effective legal basis for data processing when genuine,  explicit consent cannot be obtained. It does not  represent a blank authorization to process data, but  it works in concert with the other substantive rights  provided to individuals (access, correction, deletion,  portability) and obligations on organizations, such as  security safeguards and accountability approaches  (described in the following subsection) Automated decision-making  should not be limited  a priori because this approach risks impinging on  innovation and possibly preventing citizens from life  enhancing AI applications. For example, a restrictive  interpretation of article 22 of the EU GDPR (which  prohibits determinations based solely on automated  decision-making) might negatively affect basic  functions and future developments of autonomous  technologies, such as autonomous driving. In this  example, legal basis exceptions like consent or  contracts might not cover the whole spectrum of cases  where, for example, passengers, other drivers, and/or  pedestrians are involved.  Different levels of human involvement (human oversight)  could be tailored to different autonomous functions.  AI systems should be designed, built, and deployed  to allow for the control and judgment of humans for  those AI applications that present higher risk profiles  for individuals impacted by decisions. We believe that  risk-based degrees of human oversight  could represent  a practical solution to allow for innovative uses of AI and  to ensure control over autonomous decision-making  when necessary. AI-based industrial quality control  mechanisms may not deserve human oversight when  they single out a defective product. On the contrary, if  the algorithm excludes a candidate in a job selection  procedure or a patient for treatment eligibility, there  would be an expectation from individuals and a public  interest to have at some point a human involvement  in or oversight of the decision-making.14  Accoun tabl e  organisations would proactively seek solutions to  ensure the right degree of human intervention is  achieved based on the potential risks for individuals.4. Governments should promote access to data. Access to large and reliable datasets is essential to the  development and deployment of AI. Improving access  to reliable data would be beneficial for making design  more competitive and innovative, for better achieving  public policy priorities and for increasing quality and  quantity of products and services available to citizens.  The current situation could be improved by government  initiatives aiming at:  a) Making available public sources of information in  structured and accessible databases ( open government  data ). b) Actively supporting the creation of reliable datasets  (including personal information of individuals), which  could be used by all AI developers, by start-ups and  more broadly by industry to test automated solutions  and benchmark the quality of their algorithms. c) Fostering  i n c e n t i v e s  f o r  d a t a  s h a r i n g  between the  public and private sector and among industry players.  Similar to the efforts made in the cybersecurity space  for threat information, appropriately shared and  protected data would increase awareness and improve  privacy of the whole automated environment. A good  example could be governments funding the creation of  APIs (Application Programming Interfaces) to allow for  dynamic access to data. d) Contributing to the creation of  international voluntary  standards  that allow for easier information sharing  while noting which data fields could include personal  information (so that they can be reviewed for privacy  issues); provide guidance on methods for responsible  data sharing; and define algorithm explainability for  different AI implementations. e)  Promoting diversity  in datasets. The potential  presence of biases in the design of algorithms feed users’  distrust in technology. Greater diversity will reduce the  risk of unintended bias. In AI for medicine, it is important  that data from ethnic minorities is included in the  training data, so the result is more accurate and doesn’t  preclude appropriate medical treatment to portions of  society. The ability for research organisations to transfer  data internationally reinforces this opportunity and  governments should encourage cross border data flows. INTEL ’S AI PRIVACY POLICY WHITE PAPER Protecting individuals’ privacy and data in the artificial intelligence world 7
5. Funding research in security is essential to   protect privacy. The pace of AI advancements in the past few years has  been unprecedented. However, more work still needs to  be done to improve computing power, energy efficiency  and connectivity in data centers and in the edge devices.  More research is needed in areas such as homomorphic  encryption , which will allow extracting meaningful  information from encrypted data without the need  to disclose personal information and, therefore, will  protect individuals’ privacy.6. It takes data to protect data.  The tremendous potential of AI includes also the  possibility to deploy analytics to support and serve  public policy priorities  such as privacy, data protection  and cybersecurity. In fact, algorithms can help detect  unintended discrimination and bias, identity theft  risks or cyber threats. Artificial intelligence provides  organisations the ability to prevent and manage risks,  including threats of large scale privacy breaches. In this  way, the use of this data (some of which will be personal  data) actually has a net positive impact on privacy.15 IV. Conclusion   If the benefits of artificial intelligence and its numerous applications seem indisputable, further  debate is actually needed to address potential unintended societal consequences and risks  for individuals related to the use of AI. This paper outlines how some unique characteristics of  AI may lead to specific privacy risks. Acknowledging these concerns, we believe that the five  foundational observations described in this paper will help realize the full potential of AI to  benefit people. The list of six policy recommendations is aimed at starting a fruitful discussion  with policymakers, regulators and like-minded organisations that are exploring public policy  solutions to data protection and privacy challenges. We welcome the opportunity to discuss  these issues further as well as to receive feedback on our proposals. Intel stands ready to work  closely with all interested stakeholders to develop viable pathways to pursue AI innovation  and privacy together. 
1. “AI is best understood as a set of techniques  aimed at approximating some aspect of hu man or animal cognition using machines.”  Ryan Calo, Artificial Intelligence Policy: A  Primer and a Roadmap, 51 UC Davis Law Rev.  399, 404 (2017). 2. Source IBM marketing https://public.dhe.ibm. com/common/ssi/ecm/wr/en/wrl12345u sen/watson-customer-engagement-wat son-marketing-wr-other-papers-and-re ports-wrl12345usen-20170719.pdf  3. A useful taxonomy on data origins was de veloped by Marty Abrams, Information Ac countability Foundation (IAF), in 2013 http:// informationaccountability.org/wp-content/ uploads/Data-Origins-Abrams.pdf  4. Some data suggesting this trend can be  found in the IDC report, “Data Age 2025: The  evolution of Data to Life-Critical”, 2017  5. The eight FIPPs are Collection Limitation,  Data Quality, Purpose Specification, Use  Limitation, Security Safeguards, Openness,  Individual Participation and Accountability.  OECD Revised Guidelines on the Protection  of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Person al Data (2013), http://oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/ oecd_privacy_framework.pdf 6. D. Hoffman, P. Bruening, 2014 Rethink Pri vacy: fair information practices reinterpreted  https://blogs.intel.com/policy/files/2015/01/ RethinkingPrivacy.pdf  7. P. J. Bruening and H. M. Patterson. A Con text-Driven Rethink of the Fair Information  Practice Principles. SSRN Artificial Intelligence  — Law, Policy, and Ethics eJournal. Available  at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2843315 8. Selbst, Andrew D. and Powles, Julia, Mean ingful Information and the Right to Expla nation. International Data Privacy Law, vol.  7(4), 233-242 (2017). https://ssrn.com/ab stract=3039125  9. Centre for Information Policy Leadership,  Data Protection Accountability: The Essential  Element A Document for Discussion, 2009   https://www.informationpolicycentre.com/ uploads/5/7/1/0/57104281/data_pro tection_accountability-the_essential_el ements__discussion_document_octo ber_2009_.pdf 10. See European Data Protection Supervisor  (EDPS) Ethics Advisory Group’s report on this  topic: https://edps.europa.eu/sites/edp/files/ publication/18-01-25_eag_report_en.pdf 11. Differential Privacy is a system for limiting  the privacy loss that an individual experienc es when their private information is used to  create an aggregate data product. Differential  privacy mechanisms operate by introducing  randomness into the results of queries on  underlying confidential data. Because of the  randomness, an observer of the queries fac es ambiguity when trying to reconstruct what  the confidential data must have been in or der to produce the observed results. (Source:  Wikipedia) 12.  Homomorphic Encryption is a form of en cryption that allows computations to be  carried out on ciphertext (encrypted infor mation), thus generating an encrypted result  which, when decrypted, matches the result of  operations performed on the plaintext. The  purpose of homomorphic encryption is to  allow computation on encrypted data. Cloud  computing platforms can perform difficult  computations on homomorphically encrypt ed data without ever having access to the un encrypted data. (Source: Wikipedia) 13. McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) report, “Dig ital globalization: The new era of global  flows”, February 2016 https://www.mck insey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20 Functions/McKinsey%20Digital/Our%20In sights/Digital%20globalization%20The%20 new%20era%20of%20global%20flows/ MGI-Digital-globalization-Full-report.ashx 14. An interesting perspective was offered by the  Singapore Data Protection Commission in the  “Discussion Paper on Artificial Intelligence”,  which foresees different degrees of involve ment for human decision makers, depending  on the severity and probability of harm to in dividuals. Humans can be in-the-loop  (mak ing the final decision), over-the-loop  (taking  the decision based on options defined by AI),  or out-of-the-loop  (excluded, but in a pre defined set of use scenarios). https://www. pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/Files/PDPC/PDF-Files/ Resource-for-Organisation/AI/DiscussionPaper-on-AI-and-PD---050618.pdf  15. D. Hoffman, P. Rimo, “It takes data to protect  data”, 2018 https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/pa pers.cfm?abstract_id=2973280References 9
©2018, Intel Corporation
22 October 2018
