  Monetary Authority Of Singapore   1     Principles  to Promote Fairness, Ethics,  Accountability and Transparency  (FEAT) in the Use of Artificial  Intelligence and Data Analytics in  Singapore ’s Financial Sector  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  2 Contents   1 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ...............................  3  2 Using This Document ................................ ................................ ..................  4  3 Scope and Definitions  ................................ ................................ .................  5  4 Summ ary of Principles  ................................ ................................ ................  6  5 Fairness  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 7  6 Ethics  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  9  7 Accountability  ................................ ................................ ..........................  10  8 Transparency  ................................ ................................ ...........................  12  9 Acknowledgements  ................................ ................................ ..................  14        
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  3 1 Introduction   1.1 This document  contains a set of generally accepted Principles for the use of  artificial intelligence and data analytics (“AIDA”) in decision -making  in the provision of  financial products and ser vices. Compared to human decision -making, the nature and the  increasing use of AIDA may heighten the risks of systematic misuse . This may result in  impacts which are more widespread , perpetuated at greater speed . When used  responsibly and effectively, AIDA has  significant potential to improve business processes,  mitigate risks and facilitate stronger  decision -making.   1.2 Thus, the objectives of  this set of Principles  are as follows:    To provide firms providing financial products and services with a set of  foundational  principles to consider when using AIDA in decision -making    To assist  firms in contextualising and operationalising governance of use  of AIDA  in their own  business models an d structures    To promote public confidence and trust in the use of AIDA   1.3 This set of Principles  has been co -created with the financial industry and other  relevant stakeholders. In developing this set of Principles , MAS has worked closely with  key industry st akeholders through  the Fairness, Ethics, Accountability and Transparency   (FEAT) Committee. MAS has also sought feedback from  a range of financial institutions  and companies , who have offered their diverse perspectives and inputs . Please refer to  the Acknow ledgements in Section 9 .   1.4 In developing this set of Principles , MAS has worked  closely with the Personal  Data Protection Commission  (PDPC) , Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA)  to  align the Principles  with IMDA’s AI g overnance initiatives  which include the  Advisory  Council on the Ethical Use of AI and Data and an overall AI Governance Framework. These  initiatives aim to help businesses develop and deploy AI technologies in a responsible  manner . PDPC’s Model AI Governance Framework1 is complementary to this document ,  and provides additional illustrations and guidance on areas such as selecting appropriate  orga nisational governance measures and adopting good data management practices.                                                                    1 https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/Resources/Model -AI-Gov 
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  4 2 Using This Document   2.1 This document  sets out  Principles  for firms to consider when assessing existing  or developing new internal frameworks to govern the use of AIDA . This set of Principles  is  not intended to replace existing relevant internal governance frameworks. Firms should  continue to comply with all applicable laws and requirements.   2.2 This set of Principles  is not intended to be prescriptive . Examples provided in this   document  are purely illustrative.  Nonetheless,  through the process of ongoing industry  engagement, there is scope for MAS to identify areas where more specific or technical  guidance  would benefit the industry , with this set of Principles  serving as a foundational  framework for consideration and discuss ion.   2.3 Across all of the Principles  set out in this document , firms  can calibrate actions  and requirements under their internal governance framework based on the materiality of  the AIDA -driven decisions. The following list provides non -exhaustive and indica tive  examples of considerations that may be used when determining materiality:    Extent to which AIDA is used in decision -making ;    Complexity of AIDA model ;    Extent of automation of process of AIDA -driven decision -making ;   Severity and probability of impact o n different stakeholders, including  individuals ;   Monetary  and financial impact ;    Regulatory impact ;   Options for recourse available .   2.4 As the Principles  relate to and  reinforce each other , readers  are encouraged  to  view the Principles  in totality .     
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  5 3 Scope  and Definitions   3.1 This set of Principles  can guide all firms using AIDA  to provide financial products  and services .  3.2 “AIDA” refers to artificial intelligence or data analytics , which are defined as  technologies that assist or replace human decision -making. While this definition is broad,  the Principles  in this document  can apply to both complex and straightforward AIDA  techniques. Firms using AIDA are encouraged to calibrate their internal governance  frameworks based on considerations of materiality, as outli ned in Section 2.3.   3.3 The following definitions are used in this document :   “AIDA ” refers to artificial intelligence or data analytics , which are defined  as technologies that assist or replace human decision -making .   “AIDA Firms ” refers to firms that use AIDA to provide fi nancial products  and services.    “AIDA -driven decisions ” refers to decisions and decision outcomes made  or supported by AIDA.    “AIDA -driven decision -making ” refers to the process of making decisions  using AIDA.    “Data subjects ” refers to individu als and/or firms who  are or may be  affected by AIDA -driven decisions.    “Models ” refers to the  specific AIDA  algorithms and algorithmic processes  used to arrive at AIDA -driven decisions.     
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  6 4 Summary of Principles   Fairness   Justifiability   1. Individuals or groups of individuals  are not system atically disadvantaged  through   AIDA -driven decisions  unless these decisions  can be justified.   2. Use of personal attributes as input factors for AIDA -driven decisions is justified.   Accuracy and Bias   3. Data and models used for AIDA -driven decisions are regularly reviewed and validated  for accuracy and relevance, and to minimize unintentional bias.   4. AIDA -driven decisions  are regularly reviewed so that models  behave as designed and  intended.   Ethics   5. Use of AIDA is aligned with the firm’s ethical standards, values and codes of conduct.   6. AIDA -driven decisions  are held to at least the same ethical standards as human -driven  decisions .  Accountability   Internal Accountability   7. Use of AIDA in AIDA -driven decision -making  is approved by an appropriate internal  authority .     8. Firms using AIDA are accountable for both i nternally developed and externally  sourced AIDA models .   9. Firms using AIDA proactively raise management and Board awareness of the ir use of  AIDA.   External Accountability   10. Data subjects are provided with channels to enquire about, submit appeals for and  request reviews of AIDA -driven deci sions that affect them.   11. Verified  and relevant supplementary data provided by data subjects  are taken into  account when performing a review  of AIDA -driven decisions .  Transparency   12. To increase public confidence, use of AIDA  is proactively disclosed  to data subjects as  part of general communication.   13. Data subjects are provided , upon request,  clear explanations  on what data is used to  make AIDA -driven decisions about the data subject and how the data affects the  decision.   14. Data subjects are provided, upo n request , clear explanations on the consequences  that AIDA -driven decisions may have on them.     *********************  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  7 5 Fairness   5.1 It is important that AIDA -driven decisions do not disadvantage any particular  indiv idual or groups of individuals  without justification . Today, offering different ial  treatment to different groups of people  is an existing practice and part of current busine ss  models. While t he use of AIDA could enable analysis based on segmentation and  clustering of data , this also means that differentiation between groups could take place  at a greater scale and faster speed . The use of AIDA may also create the ability to id entify  or analyse new types of differentiation that could not previously be done. This could  perpetuate cases of unjustified differentiation  at a systemic level if not properly managed.   5.2 AIDA Firms may  have internal governance frameworks in place to assess  and set  standards of appropriate levels of  justifications behind AIDA -driven decisions , including  use of specific data attributes . Such  internal governance  frameworks  may  also have  processes which  assess  data and models used for AIDA -driven decisions  for accuracy , and  may  be calibrated based on the materiality of the decisions.   5.3 The principle s of Fairness focus on two key aspects – firstly, the justifiability and  secondly, the accuracy and bias of AIDA -driven decision s.   Justifiability   1. Individuals or groups of individuals  are not system atically disadvantaged   through  AIDA -driven decisions , unless these decisi ons can be justified.     2. Use of personal attributes as input factors for AIDA -driven decisions is  justified .  5.4 Illustration  1: An AIDA Firm use s AIDA to decide whether to approve an increase  in a customer’s credit card limit, b ased on a variety of factors . The Firm provide s  justifications to internal approving authorities for the rationale for using each factor   according to their internal governance framework . The Firm also justifies  how each factor  or combinations of different factors with varying weightages may affect the decision.  Based on these justifications, some customers may receive approvals for an increase in  their credit card lim its while others may not.    5.5 Illustration  2: An AIDA Firm uses  AIDA for customer segmentation to provide  more relevant product offerings for different customer groups. This may  include using a  customer’s age, a personal attribute, as an input factor to decid e whether to offer  retirement -related financial services and products. Based on the AIDA Firm’s internal  governance framework, the use of age as an input factor for this AIDA -driven decision may  be justified, given the relationship between age and retireme nt.   
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  8 Accuracy and Bias   3. Data and models used for AIDA -driven decisions  are regularly reviewed and  validated  for accuracy and relevance, and to minimize  unintentional bias.     4. AIDA -driven decisions  are regularly reviewed so that models behave as  designed and intended.     5.6 Illustration  3: Based on an internal governance framework, an AIDA Firm puts in  place  requirements for model validation exercises  and testing for errors or unintentional  biases. The frequency of exercises or  tests depend s on the materialit y of the decision and  the complexity of the model. For particularly material  and complex deep learning models ,  an AIDA Firm require s more frequent validation and testing.  Conversely, for less material   and more  straightforwar d models , quarterly , annual  or even less frequent  validations and  tests suffice .   5.7 Illustration  4: In addition to periodic reviews, the AIDA Firm’s internal governance  framework also identif ies specific triggers for review , including unexpected changes that  invalidate basic model assumption s. For example, an unexpected court decision on  whether an entity has defaulted on its debts might trigger a r eview of credit risk  parameters to see if the parameters need to be revised.      
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  9 6 Ethics   6.1 All firms using AIDA or not operate in line with their ethical standards . These  ethical standards are expressed through  many ways, including company  values, codes of  conduct and mission statements , and may vary across firms and geographies . Adherence  to the se ethical standards  applies equally to the use of AIDA .   5. Use of AIDA is aligned with the firm’s ethical standards, values and codes of  conduct.     6. AIDA -driven decisions  are held to at least the same ethical standards as  human driven decisions.   6.2 Illustration  5: An AIDA Firm’s human resource department has existing  recruitment rules that specify that gender should not be a consideration in making hiring  decisions, in alignment with their overall company  policy on diversity and fair  employment. The AIDA Firm deci des to implement a model or algorithm to assist in their  filtering and shortlisting of potential employment candidates. Under the AIDA Firm’s  internal governance framework, t o maintain  the same ethical standards as human driven  decisions, the model or algo rithm does  not use gender as an input or derived attribute.   6.3 Illustration  6: An AIDA Firm does not have a clear authority that oversees and  maintains its  ethical standards, and thus decides to  establish an organisation -wide  ethical  review board. In additio n, th e AIDA Firm also consider s setting  up project -specific cross functional ethical  review board s comprising stakeholders of relevant expertise and  independent representatives, which report into the organisation -wide ethical review  board.       
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  10 7 Accountability   7.1 It is important that there is clear  responsibility for and ownership of AIDA -driven  decisions  within an AIDA firm, with appropriate internal approving authorities for the use  of AIDA . Such accountability  appl ies to all uses of AIDA, whether  internally developed or  externally sourced.   7.2 AIDA -driven decisions , especially those that could significantly affect data  subjects,  need to be based on as accurate an  understanding of the data subject  as  possible . Data subjects could provide accurate infor mation about themselves through  channels  that aim  to facilitate communication  and seek recourse.     7.3 The principle of Accountability  thus focuses on two key aspects – firstly, internal  accountability, which is concerned with the AIDA Firm’s internal governan ce, and  secondly, external accountability, which is concerned with the AIDA Firm’s responsibility  to data subjects .   Internal Accountability   7. Use of AIDA in AIDA -driven decision -making  is approved by the appropriate  internal authority .       8. Firms using AIDA are accountable for both i nternally developed and externally  sourced AIDA models .     9. Firms  using AIDA  proactively raise  management and  Board awareness of the ir  use of AIDA.   7.4 Illustration  7: A Firm currently has internal approval structures in place for  decision -making, which it choose s to rely on when setting approval authorities for AIDA driven decision -making. For example, currently the Head of Financial Markets  approve s  all decisions related to the trading  function. If the fun ction is lookin g to introduce an AIDA  model  for the execution of trades , the Head of Financial Markets  would similarly approve  the use of this model  in line with the AIDA Firm’s internal governance framework .    7.5 Illustration  8: When setting approving authorities for AIDA -driven decisions, the  Firm’s internal governance framework take s into account materiality and complexity of  the decision. The Firm sets approving levels at Chief Executive Officer or Board levels  for  high ly-material decisions , with proper due diligence so that approving authorities have  sufficient understanding of the data and model logic used for decision -making.  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  11 7.6 Illustration  9: An AIDA Firm update s the Board on the use of AIDA within the Firm  on a periodic basis, so that  that the Board maintains a centra l view of all material  AIDA driven decisions. As a good -to-have, t he Firm organise s regular  Staff Town -halls to raise  awareness of the use of AIDA within the Firm, which may include department case studies,   or sharing of learning points .   External Accountability   10. Data subjects are provided with channels to enquire about, submit appeals  for and request r eviews of AIDA -driven d ecisions that affect them.       11. Verified  and relevant supplementary data provided by data subjects are taken  into account when performing a review  of AIDA -driven decisions .    7.7 Illustration  10: When informing a data subject of a AIDA -driven decision, the AIDA  Firm include s a contact number and email address  so that data subjects can enquire about  the decision and provide a reasonable basis for  review . The Firm adapt s existing  frameworks for handling customer enquiries , to assess the materiality of the issue at  hand, and the practicality of responding to such requests .   7.8 Illustration  11: The AIDA Firm provide s the data subject  with online data  management tools such as privacy or personal data dashboards. Through these  dashboards, data subjects may opt to review, update or edit their information for  accuracy and relevance.  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  12 8 Transparency   8.1 While increased transparency  in AIDA Firm s’ use of AIDA  could  improve public  understanding and confidence in AIDA , excessive transparency  could create  confusion or  unintended opportunities for individuals to exploit or manipulate AIDA models . It is  important to  balance these considerations  in determin ing the appropriate level of  transparency  in the use of AIDA . In determining levels of transparency, the materiality of  the decision  is also relevant .   8.2 Data subjects may seek  clear explanations  about  data used  for decision -making,  how data affects the decision and the consequences on data subjects . Clear explanations  do not necessitate exposure of intellectual property or publishing of proprietary source  codes. Clear explanations could  instead focus on facilita ting the  data subject ’s  understanding of the Firms’ use of AIDA.   12. To increase public confidence, use of AIDA is proactively disclosed to data  subjects as part of general communication.     13. Data subjects are provided, upon request, clear explanations on what data is  used to make AIDA -driven decisions about the data subject and how the data  affects the decision.     14. Data subjects are provided, upon request, clear explanations on the  consequences that AIDA -driven decisions may have on them.     8.3 Illustration  12: An AIDA Firm offering car insurance inform s customers that they  will be using data on driving patterns to review customer premiums .  The Firm explain s  how certain driving patterns may affect  premiums. The Firm provide s illustrative diagrams  and charts to explain the patterns identified  and the impact on different  customer groups.   The Firm also develop s a user interface to allow customers to vary potential inputs to get  a sense of the impact on premium outcomes. A custom er who is charged  a higher  premium can approach the Firm for a meaningful explanation on the reasons for the  increase. The AIDA Firm share s with the customer which customer group he falls into and  the corresponding impact on  premiums. The AIDA Firm also broadly share s with the  customer what  data is used to analyse his driving patterns and provide an avenue for the  customer to provide more accurate or updated information. In the long term, the  customer may choose to change his behaviour and cultivate good dr iving habits to ensure  that his premiums do not increase.  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  13 8.4 Illustration  13: An AIDA Firm consider s the materiality of the AIDA -driven  decision when determining appropriate levels of transparency. For example, the  AIDA  Firm use s AIDA models for fraud detect ion and to identify possible “red flags”. Given  materiality considerations and concerns of model manipulation or exploitation , an AIDA  Firm decides not to share about the AIDA model used, or provide explanations  relating to  this area. On the other hand, th e AIDA Firm deploy s an AI phone operator to handle  customer calls and engage directly with customers. In this case, the AIDA Firm opt s to  begin the conversation by informing the data subject that they are interacting with an AI  phone operator.  
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  14 9 Acknowledg ements     MAS would like to express our appreciation to the FEAT Committee, for their key role  in the creation and development of the FEAT Principles .   Hsieh Fu Hua (Co -Chair), Co-Founder and Advisor, PrimePartners   V K Rajah (Speci al Advisor), Senior Counsel and Member of Essex Court Chambers  Duxton (Singapore Group Practice)   Teo Swee Lian (Advisor), Non -executive Indepe ndent Director, SingTel and Non executive Independent Director, Avanda Investment Management   Raymond Au, Chief Data Scientist  and Head of Asia Lab, Allianz   Paul Cobban, Chief Data & Transformation Officer, DBS   Shameek Kundu, Chief Data Officer, Standard Chartered Bank   Richard Lowe, Chief Data Officer, UOB   Donald MacDonald, Head of Group Customer Analytics & Decisioning, OCBC Ban k    MAS would like to express our appreciation to the following contributors, for providing  valuable inputs and feedback to the FEAT Principles .  (In alphabetical order)   Amazon Web Services   American Express Int’l Inc   Asia Cloud Computing Association   Aviva Ltd  Barclays Bank PLC   CFA Institute   CFA Society Singapore   Citibank NA   Credit Suisse AG   Deutsche Bank AG Singapore   Etiqa Insurance Pte Ltd   Great Eastern General Insurance Ltd   Great Eastern Life Assurance Co Ltd   HSBC   Investment Management Association  of Sin gapore   Kristal Advisors   Life Insurance Association, Singapore    Lloyd’s of London (Asia) Pte Ltd   Lu International   Mastercard     Microsoft   Network for Electronic Payments  (Singapore) Pte Ltd   Oliver Wyman   OCBC Bank   Prudential Assurance Company  Singapore (Pte)  Limited   Scotiabank   Securities Association of Singapore   Singapore Exchange   Singapore FinTech Association   Standard Chartered Bank   The Association of Banks in Singapore   The Stephen J.R. Smith School of  Business at Canada’s Queen’s University   Tokio Mari ne Life Insurance Singapore  Ltd  United Overseas Bank Limited   Yair Zick, National University of  Singapore    
Principles  to Promote  FEAT  in the Use of AI and Data Analytics in Singapore ’s Financial Sector     Monetary Authority of Singapore  15   
