  
2 Recommendations for an AI Strategy in  Switzerland   A white paper o rganised by   the SATW topical platform on Arti ficial Inte lligence    Table of Content   Preamble  3  A Safe Harbour for Data  5  A Verification Body for AI  9  Increase Human Trust in AI 12  AI in Higher Education  15  Enable AI for SMEs  18    Contributors   Alessandro Curioni, Editor, IBM R esearch – Zurich   Lukas Cz ornomaz, Editor, IBM R esearch – Zurich   Joachim Buhmann,  ETH Zurich   Ernst Hafen, ETH Zurich , DatenundGesundheit Assoc., MIDATA Ge nosse nschaft   Manuel Kugler, SATW   Hervé Bourlard, Idiap Research Institute  and EPFL   Jana Koehler, Deutsches Forschungszentrum fü r Künstliche Intelligenz (DFKI)   Matthias Kaiserswert h, Hasler Stiftung   Anika Schumann,  IBM Research – Zurich      This document ref lects a consensus between the contributors , but the responsibilities lie with the  authors of each part.   The positions and opini ons in this document are those  of the contributors and don't necessarily  represent IBM's positions, strat egies or opinions.   This white paper has not undergone SATW’s usual review process, and SATW therefore assumes no  responsibility for the content or the quality of the document. Respo nsibility for these lies solely with  the auth ors.  Cover photo: freepik.com  
3 Digital transformation is radically reshaping almost every  aspect of our society. The explosion of artificial intelligence  (AI) and big data analytics applications is enabled by the  extreme availability of data in combina tion wit h the substantial computing power of modern highly distributed  computing infrastructures connected by high -speed networks.  Machine learning technologies can be trained to perform specific tasks with an efficiency and an accuracy that  can supplement  and, in  some cases, outperform that of humans. These systems provide deep insights by learning from  data and interactions with users, which is already leading to  a profound transformation of numerous industries, professions and society at large.  The curre nt state  of AI is, however, still far from delivering truly intelligent behaviour that is  comparable to human intelligence. An AI research strategy  should therefore carefully analyse AI’s history with its various waves of large promises and conceptual shor tcomings .  Recent advancements in machine learning have enabled AI  technologies to become extremely successful. Speech  recognition, natural language interaction with machines and  facial recognition based on deep learning are now commodities that have changed the wa y people interact. The  machine learning strategy of emulating human performance  by learning from human experience promises a solution to  the knowledge extraction problem. However, the automated  reasoning process is as opaque as human decision making.  Evolu tion has enabled humans to collectively reason and act  on our collective experience, though other humans are often black boxes. Today, we are confronted with computational artefacts that are adapted to complex human decision  making and, thereby, have inher ited a similar “black box”  behaviour .    1 Preamble – lead author: Lukas Czornomaz  Given the penetration of AI across most  industries, its potential impact on GDP  promises to be very high2. In Switzerland, AI is already reshaping industries  such as banking, insurance, pharmaceuticals and man ufacturin g. Furthermore,  Switzerland is the European country that  has the highest number of AI start -ups  per citizen3, with more than 100 start ups4. Many leading countries are heavily  investing in AI development strategies  and the establishment of technol ogy  trans fer centres in this field5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13    2 Chui, M., et al., (2018). NOTES FROM THE AI  FRONTIER –INSIGHT S FROM HUNDREDS OF USE  CASES. McKinsey Global Institute. Retrie ved from  www. mckinsey.com/featured -insights/artificial intelligence/note s-from -the-ai-frontier applications -and-value -of-deep -learning   3 The European Artificial Intelligence Landscape |   More than 400 AI companies built in Europe. medium.com/cityai/t he-european -artificialintelligence -landscape -more -than-400-aicompanies -build-in-europe -bd17a3d499b   4 100 start -ups on the Swiss Artificial Intelligence  Start -up Map, www. startupticker.ch/en/news/july 2017/100 -startups -on-the-swiss -artificial intelligence -startu p-map  5 Overview of national AI strategies. medium.com/po litics-ai/an -overview -of-national -aistrategies -2a70ec6edfd   6 US to endorse new OECD principles on artif icial  intelligence. www. politico.eu/article/u -s-toendorse -new-oecd-principles -on-artificial intelligenc e/amp/   7 Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI.   ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/news/ethics guidelines -trustworthy -ai  8 Eckpunkte d er Bundesregierung für eine Strategie  Künstliche Intelligenz.   www.bmwi.de/ Redaktion/DE/Downloads/E/eckpun ktepap ier-ki.pd f?__blob=publicationFile&v=4   9 « La stratégie IA, pour faire de la France un acteur  majeur de l'intelligence artificielle ».  www. enseignementsup recherche.gouv.fr/cid128618/la -strategie -ia-pour -Preamble1 
4 To date, Switzerland has not developed a dedicat ed AI  strategy. AI is one of many topics covered in the strategy  “Digitale Schweiz”.  An interdepartmental working group on  AI which should ensure knowledge exchange in the domain  of AI within the federal administration and coordinate  Switzerland's position s in international bodies, is mandated to  submit a report to the Federal Council by September 2019.  Furthermore, an interdisciplinary study on behalf of TA SWISS is evaluating the opportunities and risks of AI on the  basis of various focal points: work, ed ucation, media, consumption and administration. The publication of that study  is planned for the end of 2019.   The contributors to this publication are convinced that  Switzerland can be a frontrunner in selected fields of AI services  and applications. Howev er, to attain this position, a structured approach and common direction for efforts in AI research and technology development are required. This document formulates recommendations for an AI strategy for  Switzerland. The goal is to position Switzerland as a leading  AI country and to amplify and accelerate the positive impact  of AI on the Swiss economy. The recommendations are delivered in the context of five important  aspects of AI.   Switzerland should pioneer a model for an open market for  data, stimulating  the valuation and exchange of data while  ensuring privacy, security and trust. Thus, we propose leveraging Switzerland’s unique historical geopolitical reputation  and trust to promote itself as a safe harbour for data  storage. Furthermore, Switzerland sho uld take the lead in the  definition of the general requirements that AI systems  should follow to enhance their acceptability by businesses  and society. As AI is bein g more widely deployed, it becomes crucial to ensure that these models meet high ethical  standards and provide safety. A verification body for AI   could provide requirements for trusted ethical and safe AI  systems.     faire-de-la-france-un-acteur -majeur -de-l-intelligence artifici elle.html?menu=4   10 Pan-Canadian  Artificial Intelligence Strategy. www. cifar.ca/ai/pan canadian -artificial -intelli gence -strategy   11 United Kingdom AI Sector Deals. www. gov.uk/gove rnment/   publications/artificial -intelligence -sector -deal  12 US Presiden t’s appro ach to AI. www.whitehouse.gov/wp content/uploads/2018/05/Summary -Report -of-White -House -AISummit. pdf  13 New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan.  www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017 -07/20/content_5211 996.htm  To improve the image of AI , we need to  increase human trust in AI . A positive  message about how AI empowers humans to become more efficient, makes  knowledge more accessible and improves quality of life needs to be communicated. The profound impact of data  science on society re quires additional  educational efforts to enable the population to meaningfully use this AI technology. Corresponding challenges lead to a  demand for AI in higher education  but  also a profound revision of the topic catalogues in grammar schools. The positive effect of AI on the  Swiss economy  could be strongly accelerated if we were  to create an appropriate framework  through which to ease access and enable AI for SMEs . AI empowers SMEs to  compete better with larger market actors  and to accelerate their growth . 
5 Individuals are a major source of data for AI solutions in  various fields, including healthcare, education, urban planning, energy, and economics. This chapter focuses o n how  personal data can best be harnessed in a fair and sustainable way that protects individuals’ privacy and digital self determination and how Switzerland can play a leading role  in the concomitant democra tization of the personal data  economy.   Personal data are a new asset class15, and its market value is  estimated to reach more than one trillion Euros in 202016.  Currently, personal data are stored in incompatible silos and  are increasingly fuelling the profi ts of a few multinational data companies that of fer free services and smartphone apps in  exchange for personal data. This approach has led to a rapid  increase in socioeconomic asymmetry in the concentration of  and control over personal data17. With the incr easing use of  AI in healthcare, education and ot her disciplines, this asymmetry will increase dramatically since the companies and institutions with the largest amount of data will be able to develop the best algorithms18. This asymmetry threatens to  leave little opportunity for smaller institutions and countries  to catch up or compete, particularly countries such as Switzerland. Although academic research groups in Switzerland    14 A Safe Harbour for Data – lead autho r: Ernst Hafen   15 World Economic Forum. (2011). Personal Data: The Emergence of a New  Asset  Class (pp. 1 –40). World Economic Forum.   16 The Boston Consulting Group. (2012). The Value of Our Digital Identity  (pp. 1 –65). Retrieved from www. libertygloba l.com/PDF /public -policy/The Value -of-Our-Digital -Identity.pdf   17 Haynes, P., & Nguyen, C. M. -H. (2013). Rebalancing Socioeconomic  Asymmetry in a Data -Driven Econ omy.  In B. Bilbao -Osorio, S. Dutta, & B.  Lanvin (Eds.), The  Global Information Technology Report  (pp. 67 –72).  18 Lee, K. -F. (2017, June 24). The real threat of artificial intelligence. New  York Times. Retrieved from  www. nytimes.com/2017/06/24/opinion/s unday/artificial -intelligence economic -inequality.html  have been at the forefront of cloud computing and machine learning, the technolog y and knowledge gap between  large multinational cloud storage and AI  providers and local companies is rapidly  expanding.    In the European Union, the rights of individuals to control their personal data  have been strengthened with the enactment of the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in  May 2018.  In particular, the right to data portability  gives EU citizens the opportunity to obtain a digital copy of all their personal  data. In the revision of the Swiss data  protection law, which is currently being  discussed in parliament, the federal  council has omitted the data portability  provision on the grounds that it d ecreases the competitiveness of small and  medium enterprises, a view that is also  shared by Economiesuisse19. Thus, in  Switzerland, individuals currently possess  significantly less au tonomy in the control  of their own data than EU citizens. In a  future digi tal global society that is heavily dependent on AI solutions involving  personal data, individuals will have to  play a central role as the aggregators    19 Djonova , I., & Herzog, E. (n.d.). Eine Daten politik  des Vertrauens für Fortschritt und Innovation (No.  # 03/2018). Retrieved fro m  www. economiesuisse.ch/de/entityprint/node/4542 5 A Safe H arbo ur for Data  The status quo and Switzerland’ s future in a global AI dependent digital soc iety14 
6 and access controllers of their personal data. In the current  financial economy, most citizens possess a b ank account  and decide how to invest or spend their money. It is the individual consumer who drives the economy .  The role of citizens20,21 in a data -driven society and economy is more  central than in the current consumer economy,  which is still dominated by physical goods, because three  unique features of personal data set them apart from goods  and financial assets. F irst, personal data are a nonrivalrous  good. In contrast to money and  other physical assets, data  are not consumed; they can be copied  and reused. This fact   makes the article on Data Portability in the EU GDPR a true  innovation since it legally entitles data subjects to copies of  all their personal data22. Second, personal d ata are a new  asset class that is equally distributed among individuals. In  contrast to  the uneven distribution of financial assets, our  common biology implies that each individual possesses a  genome that contains six billion base pairs, has a heart that  beats with a similar frequency, consumes similar numbers of  meals (even though caloric i ntake differs), etc. Third, and  most importantly, individuals are the maximal aggregators  of their personal data. Only individuals have the potential  and the legal right  to aggregate medical, social media, consumer, and genome data. AI solutions in areas s uch as  healthcare, education or urban planning are increasingly  dependent on the aggregation of such different data types  from millions of people. Thus, the individual, as an active  producer and aggregator of personal data and consumer of  data services, wi ll play an even more important role in a future AI -supported society. For this to happen, however,  there is need for a new trust -promoting framework in which  citizens pl ay an active role in the personal data economy .    20 Toffler, A. (1980). The third wave.   21 Tapscott, D. (1995). The Digital Economy.   22 De Hert, P., Papakonstantinou, V., Mal gieri, G. , Beslay, L., & Sanchez, I.  (2017). The right to data portability i n the GDPR: Towards user -centric interoperability of digital services. C omputer Law & Security Review: The  International Journal of Technology Law and Practice, 34(2), 1 –11.  doi.or g/10.1016 /j.clsr.2017.10.003  Medical data stored in incompatible silos  or on paper has hindered systematic  outcomes research and medical research  in general. The only datasets that are  also in demand internationally are those  of cohorts23 funded by the Swiss  National Science Foundation , which  provide a longitudinal dataset of AIDS  patients and healthy individuals and  typically contain data from several  thousand participants.   A trust -promoting framework that  supports the fair and active pa rticipation  of citizens relies on several of the  qualities  for which Switzerland is recognized  internationally. The one person one vote  principle of direct democracy fits well  with the equal distribution of personal  data. Historically, Switzerland  has been  a  forerunner in democratically controlled  coope ratives. Some of Switzerland’s  alpine farming cooperatives are several  hundred years old24. As a repository and  platform for sharing personal data,  cooperatives offer two advantages over  other organiz ational f orms. Cooperatives  belong to their members. Muc h like Swiss  citizens who control their government,  cooperative members manage their data  and control cooperative governance and  how revenues are invested .    23 Example 1: The Swiss  Digital H ealth Cohort ,  https://www.satw.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/docum ents/02_Themen/08_Kuenstliche -Intelligenz/SATW Swiss_AI_Strategy -Example1.pdf   24 Ostrom, E. (2015). Governing the Commons (Reissued edi tion). Cambridge.  
7 The Swiss MIDATA cooperative25, with its non -profit and  ethical governance principle, aims to be  the founding example of networked personal data cooperatives in other  countries, thus promoting the democratization of the personal data economy. Moreover,  Switzerland’s trusted role as  a safe harbour and provider of financial services could be  extended t o the management of personal data. Finally, Switzerland’s neutrality and its credibility in international organizations will help promote the democ ratizatio n of the personal data economy.   Given that personal data is a non -rivalrous good, cooperatives in wh ich citizens control the aggregation of and access  to their personal data do not replace but extend the existing  global personal data ecosystem. Al l existin g providers of  data and AI solutions will benefit from such an extension,  since they obtain access t o new data aggregates. Democratically governed cooperatives acting as the fiduciaries of their  member’s data can ensure that the socioeconomic asymmetry in a global data and AI -dependent society is rebalanced and that the economic benefits of these data ar e  also returned to society at large .  Switzerland possesses an active and internationally competitive academic research community in machine learnin g,  AI, cl oud computing and data security.  Recent investments  in the Swiss Data Science Center and the Swiss Personal  Health Network initiative are further steps in strengthening  academic research in the areas of AI. As outlined above, it is  essential to empower and  enable citizens to become active data aggregators  and participants in all areas that rely  on the availability of personal data, including healthcare and    25 Example 2: Box – MIDATA Personal Data Cooperative ,  https://www.satw.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/02_Themen/08_Ku enstliche -Intelligenz/SATW -Swiss_AI_Strategy -Example2.pdf  education. Early projects and platforms  by CERN and the University of Geneva26  as well as ETH Zurich an d the University  of Zurich27 to promote and strengthen  the participation of citizens in science  are encouraging.   Two problems remain that the Swiss national parliament must address. First and  foremost, it is essential that Switzerland  adopt the data portabi lity framework   of the EU GDPR. Switzerland should do  so, not only because it is the only country in Europe that does not grant its citizens the fundamental right to a digital  copy of their personal data but more  importantly because it lays the fou ndation f or a citizen -controlled extension of  personal data and AI ecosystem.   Second, the rapid introduction of an  elect ronic identity  (eID), which is currently being discussed in parliament, is  essential. Countries, such as Estonia, that  possess such an eID have seen a transformative shift towards a digital society,  with many start -ups and international  companies offering new services. Moreover, politicians and the media need to  realize that, while it is important to talk  about privacy and data protection , it is  equally important to talk about the po  26 The Citizen Cyberlab, www. citizencyber lab.org   27 The Citize n Science Center Zürich, citizenscience.ch  Recommendations for networked personal data  cooperatives 
8 tential benefit of open, transparent and fair data sharing.  Many studies ha ve shown that people are willing to share  data for the benefit of medical research and for personalized information28,29.   Finally, finan cial supp ort for the effective initiation of the  transformation to a fair democratically controlled personal data ecosyst em is essential. Once established, a new  democratically controlled personal data economy that involves hundreds of millions of people a cross the  globe will  generate substantial benefits because of the data aggregation power of citizens and because they wil l not only contribute data but also their human intelligence. Run by citizen-owned non -profit cooperatives, these benefits will be  returned to s ociety. Examples include real -world patient reported outcomes via smartphone apps and sensors from  medical treat ments, drug efficacy or the active recruitment  of people for clinical trials. Today, pharmaceutical companies are making deals with dat a compani es for hundreds of  millions to billions of dollars to access digital health records30,31. The market value of real -time health data from    28 Vayena, E., Ineichen, C., Stoupka, E., & Hafen, E. (2014). Playing a part in  research? University students' attitudes to direct -to-consumer genomics.  Public Health Genomics, 17(3), 158 –168. doi.org/10 .1159/00036 0257   29 Mooser V, Currat C . The Lausanne Institutional Biobank: a new resource  to catalyse research in personalised medicine and pharmaceutical sciences.  Swiss Med Wkly. 2014;. doi.org/10.4414/smw.201 4.14033   30 Roche and Foundation Medici ne reach definitive merger agreement t o  accelerate broad availability of comprehensive genomic profiling in onco l-smartphone sensors and medical records  willingly and knowingly provided directly  by people will be orders of mag nitude  greater.   However, the path to establishing such a  democratically controlled data economy  cannot be financed by cl assical investment strategies that rely on venture capital equity investments. Cooperatives  belong to their members, one vote at a  time, and thu s cannot accept equity investors. Therefore, there is a need for  foundations, philanthropists and crowd  funding to bridge this initial gap to  achieve the breakeven point of data cooperatives.       ogy. (2018, June 19). Roche and Foundation Medicine reach definitive merger agreement to accelerate broad availability of comprehensive genomic   profilin g in oncolo gy.  31 GSK and 23an dMe sign agreement to leverage  genetic insights for the development of nov el  medici nes | GSK. (2018). Retrieved from  www. gsk.com/en -gb/media/press -releases/gsk and-23andme -sign-agreement -to-leverage genetic -insights -for-the-development -of-novel medicines/    
9 New risks arise with the use of AI and decision -making algorithms. Aspects s uch as bias or interpretability are nontrivial  and require a thorough examination. AI systems should follow  general ethical and safety requirements that enhance their acceptab ility by businesses and society. To date, no clear generally accepted guidelines for the implementation of AI systems  exist. Therefore, there is a need to define the essential requirements that must be fulfilled by an AI system and the associated verificat ion proce sses. The definition of such ethical  and safety requirements and their v erification implies a profound technical expertise but also a more societal, political and  philosophical point of view regarding how democracies can  adapt to coexist with AI a nd benefi t most from it.   The topic of the requirements, validation and verificati on of AI  systems is related to software liability, where providers typically  are not liable for bugs in their systems or consequential damage caused by a failure of their syst ems. Medi cal software tools  or apps also have similar challenges, and their effec tiveness  must be provable to be accredited as a medical product.  Providing broadly applicable requirements and verification  processes could advance the development and dissemi nation  of AI systems in Switzerland and thereby support and  strengthen the local economy. The global trust in its institutions and democratic system could help to position Switzerland as a global role model that defines widely acceptable  guidelines and pro cedures f or AI systems .  There are many activities in the field of trust in AI; increasing  the reliability of algorithms is a prerequisite for their deployment in critical applications. Various experts and initiatives aim    32 A Verification  Body for AI – lead author: Ma nuel Kugler   The aut hors acknowledge Markus C hristen  (Managing Director Digital  Society Initiative , Unive rsity of Zurich ) and Christian  Westermann  (Leader  Data & Analytics,  PwC Swit zerland) fo r their valuable inputs to this section.  to foster ethics in AI33,34,35,36,37. However,  there are few concrete projects establishing a holistic view for addressing general  ethics and safety requirements across industries and applications other than some  limited projects wit h specific applications,  e.g., autonomous cars38.  In different c ountries and cities, laws are  implemented to guid e the application of  machine learning and the accountability of  algorithms39,40. Currently, we do not know  of any concrete measures for the implementation of an interdisciplinary approach  to specify the suffic ient and practical requirements for the safety of  self-learning  systems and to address the validation and  verification of AI systems in Switzerland .    33 The p artnership on AI  is a multi -stakehol der  organization to better understand AI’s impacts.  www. partnershiponai.org   34 Informatics Europe recomm ends to esta blish  means,  measures and standards t o assure fair ADM  systems . www. informatics -europe.org   35 High -Level Expert Group on Artifi cial Intelligence  support s implementation of European AI strategy .  ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/high -levelgroup -artifici al-intelligence   36 MIT Turing Box as a  certific ation envir onment .  turingbox.mit.edu   37 The IEEE Global Initiativ e on Ethics of Autonomous an d Intelligent Systems.  standards.ieee.org/industry connections/ec/autonomous -systems.html   38 TÜV SÜD and DFKI to develo p “TÜV f or Artificial  Intelligence”. www. tuv-sud.com   39 European General Data Protection Regula tion.  eugdpr.org   40 New York City Council, Fairness in computing.  legistar.council.nyc.gov/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=   3137815&GUID=437A6A6D -62E1 -47E2 -9C42 461253F9 C6D0 A Verifica tion Body for AI   Towards ethical and safe  AI32 
10 General requirements and associated verification and validatio n procedu res should cover cross -sectorial industries,  be technologically independent and apply to systems of  different providers. They  should differentiate AI systems  based on whether they are truly self -learning, adaptive or  fixed. The general guidelines should al so provide a framework to determine whether or not a human is required in  the loop depending on the criticality of the application and  severity of the consequences of a failure. Decisi on-making  systems that are truly self-learning pose the greates t challenges. In such cases, a decoupling of decision making and  autonomous action -taking might be required.   Another key requirement is to demonstrate the system’s  flexibility in reacting to ne w situations. The algorithms  shou ld be robust and reliable when  facing s hifts in data or  manipulations of processed data, i.e., the algorithms have to  generalise. The algorithms should be able to detect when  the input data are outside of the trained capabi lities and  defined boundaries. Le arning algorithms must be enha nced  by an automonitoring capability to assess the uncertainty in  the algorithm’s knowledge of the domain/world. Often, it is  essential to know what one does not know. To minimize the  risk of a  system failure in such an event,  a domain -specific  process is required,  e.g., a feedback loop so humans can  remain in control of the system’s response .  The control of bias in data or AI systems must be considered. AI systems should be fair, and they shoul d not fall prey  to unintended disc rimination. There must be a s trong eth ical definition of what an AI system should and should not  decide. In particular, the responsibility for a system failure  needs to be clarified. Along with such design principles, all  AI systems should be able to expla in the reasons, at an adequate level o f detail, of why they made certain decision and  what the determining factors were in the input and training data. Bias and explainability are essential  requirements linked to ethics an d liability.  Security aspects are crucial, particularly  in cybe rsecurity . A successfully tested AI  system should be verified as safe against  known adversarial attacks. The performance of the algorithms and their adaptation needs to be verifiable while maintaining individuals’ data privacy and the  intellectual property  rights o f the system  developers. The verification process  should be as transparent and explainable  as possible. Thus, the key components of  the verification and validation procedures should be  based on open source  systems .  There are numerous incentives fo r Switzerland to establish a place to define  requirements and verify AI systems. Given its neutrality and reputation as a mediator, Switzerland is in a very favourable  position. Being known wor ldwide for  excellence in produc t quality and services, trust in  Switzerl and as a reliable  state with profound ethical standards is  high and could also apply to Swiss verified AI systems. Being small and independent, Switzerland is more agile  than other Eur opean countries. In addition, S witzerland has internationally  known rese arch institutes in the field of  AI, and various large technology companies that are leaders in AI have research  facilities here. Bringing together industry, Essential general r equirements  of AI sy stems 
11 research institutes and tec hnology companies as well as  governmental institutions to set u p a requi rements and verification process is demanding but crucial and in the interest  of all the involved parties.   Based on the statements above, we recommend defining an  institution at the go vernmental level  in Switzerland  to  assume responsibility for th e require ments and verification  of AI systems .  - The institution should provide clear but flexible  general guidelines  for testing algorithms.   - The guidelines should be extended by industry specif ic standards  and include different levels of   requirements depen ding on t he criticality of the use  cases and the severity of the consequences in case  of failure.   - Standards and guidelines can be verified by existing  industry -specific service providers and te sting bodies.  - The proposed body could be  organised as an extraparliament ary committee41 or existing verification  bodies42.  An expert committee  consisting of academic and industry  specialists in AI core technology, industry use cases, security, societal implications a nd ethics should be instal led to  develop an implementation plan  for suc h a requirements  and verification institution. SATW would be willing to organise and coordinate such a committee in collaboration with a  government body .    41 www.admin.ch/gov/de/start/bundesrecht/ausserparlam entarische kommissionen.html   42 Nation al Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of  Commerce. www.nist.gov/topics/artificial -intelligence  
12 The availability of affordabl e, highly  parallel computing, vast  amounts of training data, and economic interest from large  corporate actors in “big da ta” has led to large -scale AI systems capable of solving problems that w ere, until recently,  consi dered unsolvable for at least a decad e, if eve r.  It is predicted that these novel and complex AI technologies  will impact virtually every human activity, from  health and  education to manufacturing and warfare, and will become  central in the lives of citize ns and consumers.   In this context, it  will be critical to improve the AI image in  public discourse; hence, we are also focusing on “human  trust in AI” by stud ying how to improve the multifaceted  trust between human users and “AI s ystems” by making the  systems more robust, more intelligible to  human mi nds, and  more aligned with society’s needs. This ambitious goal  should develop along three complementary axes :   Trust in AI as an a bstract object.  A clear quantification of  AI’s techni cal performance is fundame ntal to allowing humans to anticipate  its fail ures and conversely to trust it  when it operates in a properly functioning regime, just as  one constantly infers the behaviour of other humans to  safely interact with them. Research an d development should  place  particular emphasis on the challenge  of deter mining  the uncertainty in the learned knowledge of AI agents. How  can we specify AI’s expected performance? How can we ensure that this level of perf ormance is reached? Additionally,  at a more fundamental level , how can we create a common  understa nding bet ween humans and AI?   Trust in AI as an operational system. Can we trust that  there will be proper handling of the required mass of data,  particularly regarding privacy laws and intellec tual property,    43 Raise Human Trust in A I – lead a utho r: Hervé Bou rlard  The author acknowledges Dr.  François Fleuret fro m the Idiap Research  Institute for hi s inputs to this section.  or that the  resulting systems will be robust to adversari al attacks, as is expected  from any critical software? Security is a  central topic in practice, as an AI system  remains a complex piece of software  running in a failure -prone and vulne rable  physical device.   Trust in the impact of AI on society.   Our common sense has been shaped  over thousands of years to handle the  risks and benefits of dealing with either  objects devoid of cognition or intelligent  human beings. AI creates a new category   to which our most fundame ntal behaviours h ave not (yet) been a dapted. H ow  can we prepare citizens for pervasive  intelligent systems that will influence  them in all their decisions, including personal and societal decisions? How can  we ensure that AI follo ws basic ethical  principle s and adapts to s ocietal changes? How  can we f orecast the disruptions  AI may cause to the economy?   Additionally, we believe that reproducibility and openness in the context of extremely complex AI models and large scale data corpo ra are critical and require a strong commitm ent to and investme nt in “op en science” tools and  practices that will be central to the project. Increase  Human Trust in AI   An a mbitious but necessary objective43 
13 It is clear that Switzerland has reached a critical mass in regard to the technical expertise re quired to improve AI and  make it trus tworthy a nd safe. However, at the national level,  there is no initiative that brings the different players together in a common forum that could act as a force multiplier.  Even more problematic  is the scattered expertis e and the  lack of coordinated researc h on the implications that AI will  have for various aspects of our society, ranging from the  economy to law to ethics, which is a situation that, nevertheless, reflects what is typical of AI re search worldwide .  In this context, the expert committee propose d for the  verification of AI systems would have the right to take a leading  role in increasing human trust in and public awareness of AI.  Efforts should be focused on sharing positive messages  about the impact of AI on society, increasing the transparency of AI sol utions by generally requiring explainability in  software, and finally encouraging societal debates about  wider social consequences of AI technologies .  Share positive AI me ssages44:  Empowering humans : AI will emp ower humans by realizing  technologies  that ben efit humanity instead of destroying  and intruding on the human rights of privacy and freedom  to access information.   Open source information45: Open source information and AI  collections  will provide opportunitie s for new technological  progress and global te chnological parity .    44 14 Ways AI Will Benefit or Harm Society, Forbes Technology Council,  www.forbes.com/sites/f orbestechcouncil/2018 /03/01/14-ways -ai-willbene fit-or-harm -society   45 Top 8 Open Source AI Technologi es in Machine Learning,  opensource.co m, opensource.co m/article/18/5/ top-8-open -source -aitechnologies -machine -learnin g  Content creation and information access :   AI will play a fundamental role in content  creation, enabling easier access to all  kinds of data for everyone. As a consequence, knowledge will be “ democratized”, potentially also impro ving the  enforcement of data privacy .  Positive changes in the quality of life :  There are a growing number of AI applications that actively improve people’s  lives and create positive changes in the  world. For instance, A I systems will help  improve clinical diagnoses  (e.g., applying  AI to various types of healthcare data,  cancer detection), medical prevention, or  the diagnosis of faults in physical systems. AI also has the potential to improve far ming and food production p rocesses. Finally, the security of pe ople  (including children’s safety), systems  (communication), and criminal activity  prevention will be improved .  More efficient society : Through AI, society will have the potential to become  more efficient, for instance,  by optimizing traffic and transporta tion syst ems,  reducing waste, and improving ecological behaviours. AI has great potential to  support human society in facing the  challenge of climate change and other  global threats . How to  improve human trust and AI in publics  
14 Increase transparenc y and encourage  societal d ebates46:   Embed transpare ncy in so ftware : Sophisticated AI often  takes complex a nd sometimes obscure routes (software,  data, etc.) in its methodologies, data mining, and algorithms. We should encourage ways to embed tr ansparency  and clarity int o the software (as well as hardware).  For instance, when AI makes life -changing judgments ar ound  sentencing, welfare, and medical decisions, it is fair to assume that those affected need to know how these decisions  were made .   Address m ultifaceted AI conce rns: Encourage debates  across society  to ensur e that we use the various AI technologies (which are changing the way we behave, wo rk and  interact with others) in ways that are ultimately beneficial  and that consider many kinds of c oncerns .   Clearly identify  long-term impacts of AI developments : The  technology industry must recognise the long -term impacts  of AI developments and assume responsibility for the wider  social consequences of its w ork. This goal requires policy  makers to st art thinking seriously abo ut the challenges that  may arise from  the adva ncement and increasing application  of AI across all industrial sectors .  Engage business and citizens in discussions : Businesses and  citizens need to become more broadly engaged in the discussions, recognising t heir common stakes in defining the  future. Thanks to AI, we have the opportunity to redesign  many aspects of our world and to make the most  of the opportunities  provi ded by new technologie s. We must focus  on making these changes i n ways that we all trust a nd that    46 Could transparency make AI safe  and reduce public fears  ? TechWorld,   October 2017, www.techworld.com/data/could -transparency -make -ai-safereduce -public -fears -3665487/  enhance the quality of lif e and wellbe ing  of individuals and society rather than in  ways that damage lives .  Focused studies, monitoring and anal ysis47: AI guidance should be developed  through focused and multidisciplinary  studies, monitoring, and an alysis. Maximizing the impact of AI d evelopmen ts  and their acceptability by soc iety will  indeed require engagement with cross disciplinary groups, including computer  scientists, social scientists, psychologists,  economists, and la wyer .  Increase transpar ency and data privacy :  In that direction , the EU General Data  Protection Regulation (GDPR)48 is prob ably the most important change in data  privacy regulation in 20 years.     47 AI, People, and S ociety,  Eric Horvitz,  Science, July  2017:  Vol. 357, Issu e 6346 , science.sciencemag.org/content/357/63 46/7  48 eugdpr.org  
15 Machine learning and AI are currently funda mentally changing the way we think ab out compu ting at larg e, especially  how we approach algorithm design, software engineering  and computer systems engineering. Modern intelligent decision -making systems process and interpret high  volume  data streams for c omputer vision, natural language and  speech pr ocessing, ro botics, and health data analysis and,  more generally, for flexible data -centric model building in  engineering, natural science and, for the first time, in the  humanities. S uch systems commonly proce ss heterogeneous data with substantia l uncerta inty caused by measurements. Classical concepts of how to establish the correctness of planning and decision -making algorithms when they  process uncertain data often rely on worst -case guarantees  that do not se em to be adequate and predictive enou gh for  many real -world applications. Self -adapting AI algorithms  must generalize well over fluctuations and model misspecifications; they should be resilient by proper regularization to  avoid o verfitting, i.e., “reading  the tea leaves”. On the other  hand, versatile  intelligent  systems should also be sufficiently  flexible to exploit the signal in data to its full extent for prediction. Intelligent decision -making systems should provide  (provable)  guarantees to deliver typ ical answers with a high  predictive v alue; how ever, scient ifically, it is still mostly unknown what that means for algorithm design, and we need  large research programs to make progress on these questions beyond the standard parad igm of supervised machine  learning. Research on these fundament al questi ons will als o  strengthen public trust in this technology that is about to be  deployed for autonomous transport, for health care applications, for societal infrastructure management and  for public  and private se rvices, including entertainment .     49 AI in Higher Educ ation – lead author: Joachim Buhmann  AI in Higher Education   A core research  topic49 
16 Where does higher and conti nuous education stand in this  scientific revolution? Computational thinking has clearly  amended the scientific method, the unforeseeabl y successful methodology o f industrialized societies, by adding  a  third pillar to empiricism – experimentation, theory bu ilding  and computational modelling. In light of the big data challenge, we must revisit all aspects of computational thinking  and fuse it with probabilistic reas oning. Lessons from the  history of AI  indicate  that the reduction of intelligent behaviour to l ogical calculus delivers successful expert systems  but can also be interpreted as one of the causes of the AI  winter since neither the scientific community nor t he general public has seen its high e xpectatio ns of AI fulfilled. Human intelligence clearly em ploys rational logical calculus,  but it seems to be even more governed by our subconscious abilities to imitate intelligent behaviours and, more  importantly, by our capacity to teach such behaviours  to  other  human beings across generations. Deep learning, with  its inherent connectionism, emulates this style of thinking as  opposed to the symbolic reasoning strategy and connects  to the age of cybernetics before symb olic AI. We see predictive patterns i n data ap parently without using a consciously  accessible, “rationally accessible” theory; for example, medical doctors are top experts in using their experience to  achieve successful benefits i n health care with often v ery  little theoretical understanding that woul d explain the success in diagnosis, prognosis and  therapy .    Current educational programs in higher  education have to evolve to strengthen  probabilistic computational thinking.  Such a mindset will be vital for our future  society since it will larg ely deter mine the  value generation of future products and  service. Are we prepared for these challenges in higher education? Current curricula in computer science emphasize a  scientific methodo logy for algorithms  and sy stems design and their analysis,  which mostly focuses on the efficient  usage of computational resou rces such  as memory requirements and processing  time. Data science, as a necessary prerequisite for intelligent reasoning, planning and acting in the real wo rld, demands resilient algorithms and  systems  design in computation. These two scientific cultures must be fused into a coherent picture of computational reasoning  and inference. Resource efficient computation should be balanced w ith the predictive power o f computational solutions. In many ap plication s, this trade -off  leads to a win -win situation in whi ch superior predictions can be computed in a  more efficient way than with traditional  algorithmic approaches .   AI education  should be modernized  
17 Are our students in higher educati on well p repared for this  epochal paradigm shift? The answers to this question depend  on their specialization of s tudies and the role of model building by computation in the respective field. R equired  knowledge and skil ls could range from the developer lev el,  where  novel AI solutions are created and deployed, to various  grades of the expert user level, where there is creative usage of  AI tools in various application domains. Science, technology,   engineering and mathemati cs (STEM) students mostly acquire  a solid basi s for this paradigm shift due to rigorous mathematical training.   Future curricula reforms should be asses sed according to criteria that strengthen these educational goals. The long tra dition  of deterministic co mputational thinking has to be complemented by  a rigorous education in probabilistic modelling and  the design of probabilistic algorithms that can deli ver typical  solutions and readily adapt to changing input data properties,  demo nstrating at least traces of intelligence. In addition, a  knowl edge of s ystems theory and (optimal) control should also  be substantially required in disciplines outside of engin eering.   The evolution of the scientific method by probabilistic computational t hinking has to influence c urricula in all scientific discipline s, rangin g from physics to theology. Digitalization and  intelligent information processing affect nearly all areas  of human thought and will leave a profound footprint on all disciplines. Novel  ways to conduct research are expected to emerge  in the humanit ies when intelligent search algorithms can scan  large digital libraries orders of magnitude faster than human  investigators; sociological experiments can be conducted at  the scale of societies.  Research strategies from the natural sciences and engineering might sub stantially enrich the method  catalogue of the humanities, and conversely, a novel common  language will al so enrich the STEM disciplines with advances in  computational humanities. As a society, we should make pa r-ticular efforts to empower all stude nts in  higher education to participate in these  societal transformations.   What are the needs of the workforce in  the private and public sectors? AI technologies have enriched the start -up culture with novel models of co llaboration  and communication. Work t eams are now  forming over virtual platforms, and continuous education migh t be provided  through such platforms. AI tools affect  the job profile of intellectuals and highly  skilled brain workers . The critical thinking  skills of such employees will be essent ial  in th is transformation when algorithms  start to replace experts in the ir decision making roles. Imagine a radiologist interacting with an automated radiology scoring program: for various ta sks, the algorithm already  delivers superior performance in sco ring radi ology images due to  its speed and enormous storage capacity.  The humans in the loop have to be able  to evaluate the machine’s decisions, and  such a competence for quality assurance  requires profound computation al training.  Continuous educational p rograms w ill  serve such an educational need. In particular, aging societie s should allocate the  necessary resources for continuous education to remain competitive with societies of developing c ountries that are usually characterized by much younger  populat ions than  the highly industrialized  world .  Getting our student s and workforce ready for AI 
18 AI has not been an important sub ject in higher education in  Switzerland. Few educational cours es have been available in  the last 20 -30 years, and those only showed si ngle aspects  of AI in light of a particular approach. Furthermore, computer science has not been viewed as a strong and im portant  field of its own but often been subsumed under other s ciences. Only very recentl y has this approach started to  change , for exa mple in the “Lehrplan 21”.   Consequently, we do not find much representation of computer science skills among the manageme nt of SMEs in  Switzerland. Notably, a deep understanding of al gorithms,  modelling, or so ftware architecture is a rare skill t hat is  highly in demand. This lack of skills makes it very difficult for  SMEs to assess what AI can truly do to bring innovation to   their businesses and what type of problems can be solved  by the current state of AI tec hnology. Many industry representative s are dee ply influenced by the deep learning hype  and believe that this technology is all that AI is about and  that it will solve a ll problems. Furthermore, the hysteria  about AI as a job kille r encourages many companie s to prefer to look into optimization  and auto mation scenarios but  less into innovation. Becoming more efficient and flexible is  important; however, such a mindset does  not necessarily  lead to innovative products and services.   Num erous companies struggle t o understand the impact of  digitaliza tion and novel technologies on their business.  These companies need to link technology (computer science, AI and others) to the tra nsformation scenarios that  may turn out to be highly relevant for them. For example,  consider booking.com (or uber.com), wher e brokers  have  taken over a market and created a difficult situation for the  local Swiss hotel industry. A similar effort is curren tly underway in Switzerland to establish a brokering service f or    50 Enable AI for SMEs – lead author: Jana Koehler  access to AI -related te chnological know how. Such efforts ar e rarely beneficial to  SMEs, which have limited budgets .  Enable AI for SMEs   Create an appropriate environment50 
19 - Offer courses for postgraduate education that teach AI as  part of computer science and o ffer a broad and adequate  picture of the technology .  - Adequately  inform S MEs about AI safety, technological  limitations and risks .  - Show examples51 of innovative and deployed applications  of AI to broaden the understanding of the opportunities  that AI can off er (do not oversell curren t laboratory prototypes that are pres ent in th e media, e.g., in medical diagnosis) .  - Understand how AI, digitalization, in dustry 4.0, and novel  business models interact for SMEs52,53.  - Link AI with economics and show transformation sc enarios that help SMEs to reposition themselves if necessary .  - Describe a nd illustrate how AI and other technologies will  impact typical professions in Swi tzerland and show what  new professions will be created; link this information to  educational offers .  - Start with key industries i n Switzerland to drive the transforma tion of t he Swiss economy through AI .  - Help SMEs look beyond the hype and provide methods  that e nable them to evaluate technology based on their  needs and opportunities .     51 Industry 4.0 – German y Ma rket Report and Outlo ok.  www. gtai.de/GTAI/Navigation/EN/Invest/Service/Publ ications/business informa tion,t=indust rie-40--germany -market -report -andoutlook,did=917080.html   52 Statusreport "Arbei tswelt Industrie 4.0". shop.vde.com/de/statu sreportarbeitswelt -indus trie-40-download   53 Smart Service Welt – Internetbasierte Dienste für die Wirtschaft.  Deutsche Akadem ie Der Technikwissenschaften.  www. acatech.de/Projekt/smart -service-welt/  - Link to international s ources to make it  easier t o learn about AI applications  created  by SMEs in other countries .  - Create a network of experts and  knowledge resources that SMEs can  acces s at low cost without paying high  membership or brokering fees .  - Create one strong industrial representation in IT to su pport the exchange of  knowledge and n etworking  as opposed to the current situation with  scattered IT industry associations .   Concrete recommendation s to enable AI for SMEs  
  
