                  Strasbourg, 26 Novem ber 2018  CDPC(2018)18                       THEMATIC SESSION   ON   ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE AND CRIMINAL LAW     THE  APPROACH  IN COUNCIL OF EUROPE MEMBER STATES     THE CASE  OF AUTOMATED  VEHICLES     28 November 2018   Strasbourg (France)   Palais de l’Europe (Room 9)               PROGRAMME          
Page | 2    The Thematic Session on artificial intelligence1 and criminal law responsibility will focus  on the importance of a meaningful  approach in legal systems across Europe to deal  with th e challenging  questions posed by the increased presence of artificial intelligence  in civil life .   The full -day session will take place on 28 November 2018 , at the Palais de l’Europe  (Room 9 ) in Strasbourg.   The Council of Europe aims to achieve ambitious targets, including:     i. Examine and ascertain the current existing scope and substance of relevant  national criminal legislation and international law per taining to the use of  automated  vehicles (or other AI deploym ent), as well as to determine where and  how regulatory powers are established within the compete nt national public  authorities.   ii. Determine where certain conduct has been or should be prohibited and  criminalised in relation to the delegation, division or ass ignment of tasks,  functi ons and behaviours to automated  technologies, and the possible cross border -relevance .   iii. Illustrate the findings under ii (see supra ) using the case of automated driving :  should  new principles and norms of attribution and accountability for natural or  legal persons be established to uphold C ouncil of Europe  Conventions’ goals if  automated driving (or other A rtificial Intelligence  deployment) operate s across   borders .  iv. Examine the scope and substance of an international legal instrument to provide  common standards for the cr iminal law aspects of automated  technologies, in  particul ar automated  vehicles.     Wednesday , 28 November 2018        09:30 - 09:40 Opening of the Conference and welcome address       Mr Christos Giakoumopoulos , Director General  of Human Rights and  Rule of Law, the Council of Europe      Welcome , introduction, purpose of the day     09:40 - 10:50  SESSION  I: Introductory remarks and p resentation of the  project “Artificial  Intelligence and Criminal L aw. The  approach  in Council of Europe member States – The case of  automated driving ”.    Why artificial intelligence is important for criminal law – The  role of the Council of Europe     10:50 - 11:10   Coffee  break  11:10  - 12:30   SESSION I I: State of play in Council of Europe  member  States                                                    1 There is no agreed upon definition of Artificial Intelligence (AI), but for the purpose of this paper the Council of Europe  recognises the term as encompassing systems that are operational and capable of per forming complex tasks whose  goal is to achieve the imitation by a machine of the cognitive abilities of a human being.   https://www.coe.int/en/web/human -rights -rule-of-law/artificial -intelligence   
Page | 3    12:30  - 14:00  Lunch break    14:00 - 15:30   SESSION II I: From coach to car to driverless – Criminal L aw  without a human actor : consequences  if we “loose the  human actor  as possible perpetrator”   15:30 - 16:30 SESSION IV : Automated driving, MLA and gathering of  evidence. What are the challenges in criminal proceedings in  cases of fatal traffic accidents involving automated driving?   16:30 - 16:50  Coffee  break   16:50 - 17:20  Summary of the Thematic Session discussions  and  Conclusions   17:20   Close of the Thematic Session  and reception  
Page | 4    Session I   Presentation of the project “Artificial  Intelligence and Criminal Law .  The approach in Council of Europe member  States – The case of  automated  vehicles”   Background and purpose of this session:   Technological developments are rapidly evolving in the 21st century and especially in  the newly developed sector of Artificial Intelligence. Long -term technological trends in  this domain suggest that Artificial Intel ligence entities will become more and more  involved in modern civil life by operating and engaging in it. Currently, automated  vehicles operate at the push of a  button and count less and less with the presence of a  human driver which used to be entirely responsible for every part of the vehicle’s  operation. In this exciting age of technology, the State authorities and international  organisations are working hand in hand to keep up as there is no common legal  framework or international legal instruments addr essing the discussed situation in the  Council of Europe m ember States. The purpose of this session is to present the concept  of Artificial Intelligence and the role that the Council of Europe can have in such a  domain as well as an overview of the issues o f criminal law responsibility with  automated driving.   Guiding questions/key issues for discussion:   - Why is understanding Artificial Intelligence important to the Council of Europe and to  its member States?   - What are the main objectives of the Council of  Europe and its Committee on criminal  law (the CDPC ) with regards to Artificial Intelligence?   - What is the scope/impact that Artificial Intelligence entities can have on everyday life?   - What is understood to be automated driving?   - What are the basic c riminal law issues that can arise from such technologies in the  case of automated driving?   Agenda     Objective of the session   Rapporteur: Prof.  Sabine Gless     Experts input   Prof. Dr. Dominik Herrmann   Prof. Mariarosaria Taddeo   Discussion of guiding questions and formulation of responses and  recommendations       
Page | 5    Session I I  State of play in Council of Europe member States   Background and purpose of this session:   The increased presence of Artificial Intelligence in everyday life presents challenging  questions to the Council of Eu rope member States . Over the last years some member  States have made substantial progress in regulating automated driving by focusing  legislative efforts on the implementation of general technical standard s for special  permits allowing automated driving, as well as regulations of the functions that such  automated vehicles must possess. This session aims at the comparison and  understanding of the different criminal legislations  set out by the member States, and  to highlight and compare the issues of automated driving at a domestic and  international level.  It will also provide an excellent opportunity to have an exchange  of  views on the cur rent works carried out in  States with regard to the criminal law  regula tion of Artificial Intelligence and in particular  automated vehicles.   Guiding questions/key issues for discussion:   - What are the recent developments done in Council of Europe member States to  regulate automated driving?   - What are the commonalities and differences between the already drafted Council of  Europe member States’ legislations?   - Who are the different regulative authorities?   - What are the recurring issues in the legislative process, if any?   - Can any lacunas be identified in the realm of legislations?   Agenda     Objective of the session      Rapporteur: Mr Sławomir Buczma , Chair of the Council of Europe Committee on Crime  Problems  (CDPC)   Experts input   Mr Joël Valmain   Ms Fiona Peters en (United Kingdom )  Prof. Dr.  Eric Hilgendorf (Germany )  Mr Pierre -Mathieu Gaite  (France)   Prof. Dr. Susanne Reindl -Krauskopf (Austria )  Ms Irene Norsted  (Norway)   Discussion of guiding questions and formulation of responses and  recommendations  
Session I II  From coach to car to driverless – Criminal Law without a human actor:  consequences  if we “loose the human actor as possible perpetrator”   Background and purpose of this session:   The fact that robots have become part of our daily lives raises novel issues in criminal  law; driving automation is a prominent example for this. Robots can malfunction and  cause serious harm. But as things stand today, they are not suitable recipients of  criminal punishment, mainly because they cannot conceive of themselves as morally  responsible agents and because they cannot understand the concept of retributive  punishment.   The question thus arises whether humans who produce, program, market and employ  robots can be subject to (novel) criminal liability? The answer is yes, in cases of  intentional conduct if someone knowingly uses a robot to cause harm to others.  Liability for negligence is problematic because modern robots are self -teaching so that  their actions cannot be fully predicted. A person who allows a robot to interact with  humans therefore can foresee that the robot might get out of control and cause harm.  In light of the overall social benefits associated with the use of many of today’s robots,   one could argue in favor of limiting criminal liability of operators and providers to  situations where they neglect to undertake reasonable measures to control the risks  emanating from robots. At the same time the public will demand that robots are used  with utmost care when deployed in the living environment.   Guiding questions/key issues for discussion:   Why do robots challenge traditional notions of criminal law, namely the concept of an  actor or a legally relevant act/conduct and eventually the overall idea of responsibility  in criminal law?   Is there a “responsibility gap”, and if so do we need to close it with criminal law, or can  the policy objective of utmost care when employing AI be achieved with civil law torts?   Is there a need to think about new criminal law responsibilities, like that of a provider  of an AI service, similar like the responsibility of legal persons, established in Art. 12 of  the Cybercrime Convention, ETS 185?   Agenda     Objective of the session   Rapporteur:   Prof. Sabine Gless     
Page | 2    Expert s input   Prof. Bryant Walker Smith    Prof. Bruno Deffains   Ms Dafni Lima, PhD Cand.   Dr. Jérôme Perrin  (Renault)     Discussion of guiding questions and formulation o f responses and  recommendations   
Page | 2      Session IV   Automated driving, MLA and gathering of evidence. What are the  challenges in criminal proceedings in cases of fatal traffic accidents  involving automated driving?   Background and purpose of this session:   The application of AI in the realm of automated drivi ng poses new challenges for the  establishment of liability where damages raise the question of possible criminal  responsibility. Based on the example of a fatal accident occurring during automated  driving, experts in Session IV will address issues related to the cross -border gathering  of evidence, fact -finding and evidence evaluation.   The data generated during an automated car journey is not normally stored (fully) in  the vehicle, but is saved automatically elsewhere by the producer of the car for  example or by someone else. Thus criminal investigation authorities face the usual  problems of gathering digital evidence, especially gaining access to data stored with  cloud service providers abroad, where the application of the US CLOUD ACT of 2018  vis-a-vis the  EU’s proposal for a directive on e -production orders are to be taken into  account. Both want to solve the problem that through the search of computers and by  way of remote access to digital data stored in the cloud or in a computer, data can be  obtained h owever this might infringe on territorial sovereignty.   The biggest problem is that in the case of a fatality connected to automated driving  that relies on AI, experts face the so -called “black box problem” (not to be confused  with a Data Event Recorder po ssibly required in an automated car): steering a car in an  unknown environment requires such complex computation that in a trade -off between  efficiency and explainability, computer scientists opt for a deep learning model that  leaves investigation authorit ies in the dark about the decisions taken during the car  journey. Therefore, the investigaton of an alleged crime connected to driving  automation might not establish the relevant facts.   Furthermore, in order to determine what safeguards should be adopted d uring the  collection of such data while investigating an accident (criminal or non -criminal  liability), clarification on how far these data affect the right to privacy of any person  needs to be clarified. If we are to consider that no privacy rights are af fected would the  same rules on cross -border collecting of meta -data or real time digital data be applied?   In addition as the automated car is a movable device some of the data might be  moving around with this car. If the automated car is located in another  State and/or  travels causing damages/criminal acts along different locations, could the interception  of these data be carried out without the assistance from and/or knowledge of the  territory where the robot -car caused the accident? Or should only the ass istance of the  State where the data are stored be requested? Would Articles 19 and 20 on  interception of communications of the EU MLA Convention of 2000 be applicable (no  parallel rules are to be found in the Council of Europe 2nd Protocol to the MLA  Conve ntion of 2001)?  
Page | 3    Guiding questions/key issues for discussion:   How will or should international co -operation in criminal matters function with regard to  the specific case of AI driverless cars?   Could the traditional/usual instruments of international co -operation apply as they  stand or should they be adapted to these new cases?   Does automated driving need a common supranational approach?   Should the rules governing the cross -border evidence invo lved be different from the  retention, gathering and storing of any other digital evidence?   Agenda     Objective of the session   Rapporteur:  Prof. Dr.  Lorena  Bachmeier   Expert s input   Mr Andrea Candrian     Prof. Juliette Lelieur     Mr Erik Verbert     Discussion of guiding questions and formulation of  responses and  recommendations      
Page | 4    Conclusions     i. Summary of the sessions’ outcomes   Prof. Sabine Gless   ii. Conclusive statement and p lanning of fu ture work   Mr Slawomir Buczma, Chair of the CDPC   iii. Closing of the Conference   Mr Carlo Chiaromonte, Council of Europe        
