PRIORITISATION  UNCOVERED  The Discoverability  of Public Interest  Content Online Rapporteurs:   Eleonora Maria Mazzoli  Damian Tambini Council of Europe study  DGI(2020)19
         PRIORITISATION   UNCOVERED    The Discoverability    of Public  Interest    Content  Online   Authors:   Eleonora  Maria  Mazzoli , Researcher,  LSE           Dr. Damian  Tambini , Associate  Professor,  LSE  Council  of Europe  
            This study  was prepared  within  the context  of the  work  of the Committee  of Experts  on Media   Environment  and Reform  (MSI -REF).    The views  expressed  in this study  are the  responsibility  of the author s and do not necessarily   reflect  the official  line of the Council  of Europe .  All requests  concerning  the reproduction  or  translation  of all or part of this document  should   be addressed  to the Directorate  of Communication   (F-67075  Strasbourg  Cedex  or publishing@coe.int).   All other  correspondence  concerning  this  document  should  be addressed  to the Directorate   General  Human  Rights  and Rule  of Law.   Layouts  and Cover  Page:    Information  Society  Department   Council  of Europe   Images:  Shutterstock   This publication  has not been  copy -edited  by   the SPDP  Editorial  Unit  to correct  typographical    and grammatical  errors.   © Council  of Europe,  November  2020  
Table  of Content s    Executive  Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  2  Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  2  1. A Framework  for Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 5  1.1. Context  and Significance  ................................ ................................ .............................  5  1.2. Definitions  and Regulatory  Context  ................................ ................................ ...........  12  2. A Changing  Landscape:  Industry  Practices  and Implications ................................ .............  25  2.1. Technological  Architecture  ................................ ................................ ........................  29  2.3. Users’  Agency  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  29  2.4. Commercial  Negotiations  ................................ ................................ ..........................  30  3. Potential  Problems  Related  to Online  Content  Prioritisation  ................................ ...........  40  3.1. Threats  to Media  Pluralism  and Independence  ................................ .........................  40  3.2. Forms  of Soft Propaganda  ................................ ................................ .........................  41  3.3. Forms  of Soft Censorship  and Threats  to Freedom  of Expression  .............................  42  3.4. Threats  to the Sustainability  of PSM  and Local  Providers ................................ ..........  43  3.5. Threats  to Users’  Autonomy  and Perpetuation  of Inequalities  ................................ . 44  3.6. Lack  of Intermediaries’  Organisational  Transparency  and Accountability  .................  45  4. Conclusions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  46  Annexes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 50  Annex  1 – Definitions  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  50  Annex  2 – Methodology  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  52  Annex  3 – Summary  of Relevant  Council  of Europe’s  Instruments  ................................ ...... 53  References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  56            
      2   Executive  Summary    Whilst  the freedom  of expression  implications  of content  takedown,  ‘privatised  censorship’  and down ranking  of content  have  been  much  discussed  in recent  years,  content  curation  practices  like up-ranking   and prioritisation  have  been  under  less scrutiny.  Yet content  moderation  and curation  are two sides  of  the same  coin and they  both  determine  which  content  is circulated  and accessed  online.  In  contemporary  media  systems,  routes  for accessing  audio -visual  media  content  online  are more   complex  than  the channels  and electronic  programmes  guides  (EPGs)  typical  of linear  distribution.  As  media  consumption  shifts  onto  a range  of on-demand,  mobile,  social  and strea ming  services,  the role  of hardware  devices,  operating  systems,  users’  interface  design,  and related  search  and discovery   functions  becomes  pivotal  in nudging  audiences’  choices  and ultimately  driving  access  to and  consumption  of content.  The aim of this report  is to provide  a clearer  understanding  of what   prioritisation  of public  interest  content  means  in an internet -distributed  ecosystem,  discuss  emerging   issues  with  current  industry  practices  in this area,  and highlight  related  policy  needs,  and potentia l  avenues  for intervention.    Definitions and regulatory framework Content prioritisation processes refer tothe range ofdesign and algorithmic decisions that positively discriminate and promote content by making itmore discoverable orprominent ondifferent devices and related user interfaces .Ifagatekeeper prioritises content ,making itprominent and more discoverable ,itwill have increased reach ,apotentially wider audience and/or bemore likely tobeaccessed byaspecific target group . Currently, online content curation practices and related prioritisation decisions arenot covered byaspecific regulatory framework, but inthe linear distribution, EPGs and cable services are covered bylegacy broadcasting and must carry rules .While thepolicy debate isgrowing in different national contexts, there still alack ofacoordinated approach and alack ofknowledge ofindustry practices and policy needs inthisarea . Industry practices in a changing landscape Arange ofnew, commercial and non-commercial content prioritisation practices are inoperation .Media and technology companies promote content through electronic programme guides, on demand recommendations, social media feeds, search results display, user interface design and other algorithmic processes .Insome cases, buttoan extent unknown, prioritisation isbased ondeterminations that content serves the public interest .Inother cases these decisions are driven by private interest ,economic incentives, and purely commercial transactions . Researchers have not been able toascertain why such content is prioritised ,asthese decisions are complex and involve different actors . Overall ,factors that caninfluence decisions onwhat toprioritise aspublic interest content include regulatory environment ,technological architecture ,level ofusers’ agency and literacy ,and commercial negotiations between intermediary services and content providers . 
      3     Figure  1. Overview  of the report  and summary  of its key messages   Emerging issues Key issues related to current industry practices and that are relevant  for the Council of Europe and its member states include: -threats to media pluralism and independence; -potential private and state capture; -prioritisation as soft censorship and propaganda; -the long -term sustainability of public service media and local  content providers;  -threats to citizens’ autonomy and perpetuation of inequalities;  -lack of intermediaries’ transparency and accountability.  Recommendations The Council ofEurope and itsmember states should consider arange of new policy interventions inorder tomonitor and mitigate possible detrimental impacts ofprioritisation of‘public interest’ content, and ensure that determinations ofpublic interest content aregenuinely based onthepublic interest . Such interventions could include acombination ofminimum legal, operational and technical standards over content curation processes that areintroduced with aco-regulatory approach ;regulatory obligations and voluntary incentives topromote exposure while respecting consumers’ freedom ofchoice ;targeted media literacy initiatives ;and sector -specific ownership and independence rules that can foster fairindustry practices and avoid undue market and state power over content discovery . 
      4   Introduction   With  the shift  towards  IP-delivery,  Internet -connected  devices  and an increasing  use of on-demand  and  streaming  video  services,  the media  industry  has grown  into a complex  system  where  search,  discovery   and ranking  functions  are powerful  determinants  of access  to content . Search  providers,  social  media,   video  user  interfaces  and app store s are increasingly  seen  as gatekeepers , grabbing  control  of the online   media  environment,  influencing  audiences’  choices , filtering  what  content  can be found  and accessed   online , and potentially  influencing  democra tic processes  (Epstein,  2018;  Laidla w, 2012;  Moore  and  Tambini,  2018;  Tambini  and Labo,  2016;  Zittrain  2014) . This report  will argue  that the content  policies   and prioritisation  practices  of these  intermediaries  are not neutral  decisions  that happen  in a vacuum .  On the contrary,  they  have  significant  cultural,  political  and economic  implications.  What  video  clips   are recommended  on your  YouTube  homepage,  what  posts  are most  visible  in your  personal  Facebook   newsfeed,  what  is included  in the results  of the first page of your  Google  search,  or what  apps are  included  in the default  settings  of your  smart  TV can have  a decisive  influence  on the content  and  information  that you access . Because  of its importance  as a determinant  of media  consumption,   content  prioritisation  has been  a source  of tension  between  the various  media  stakeholders  that are  competing  for the presence  and reach  on physically  limited  interfaces  and for the limited  attention  of  viewers.    Although  academics  and publishers  have  raised concerns  about  the impact  of gatekeeping  power  on  media  plurality,  freedom  of expression  and control  over  public  opinion  formation  (Craufurd  Smith  and  Tambini,  2012;  Laidlaw,  2010,  2012;  Napoli,  2015,  2019) , prioritisation  has received  only  intermittent   attention  from  policymakers . Content  prioritisation  depend s on multiple  actors  involved  in the audio visual  value  chain  and it is part of broader  policies  and curation  strategies  (see Figure  2). Content  might   be prioritised  because  it is deemed  to be worth  the attention  of the viewer,  or because  viewing  has  economic  value  for the creator  and/ or the intermediary  or advertiser . Whether  content  should  be  prioritised  because  it is deemed  to serve  public  and societal  values  and achieve  public  interest   objectives  is only  recently  becoming  a topic  of policy  debate.  The ques tion of whether  law and policy   should  intervene  and deliberately  create  regimes  of prominence  for the online  world , or whether  it  should  step  back  from  the ongoing  process  of ad-hoc private  construction  of a new  prominence  regime ,  raises  complex  issues  at the intersection  of freedom  of expression  and media  pluralism.    Historically,  spectrum  licensing  has enabled  prioritisation  of broadcast  channels  subject  to higher  public   interest  standards  and stronger  accountability.  However,  at the time  of writing,  most  of these  regimes   do not apply  online,  or apply  only  to a very  limited  set of digital  intermediary  services.  Several  public   and private  institutions  are drafting  ethical  standards,  ranking  guidelines  and general  content  policy   guidelines  as part of their  corporate  social  responsibility  efforts,  which  however  are leading  to a  disconnected  and fragmented  framework.  Because  of the implications  for fundamental  rights,  pluralism   and democracy  the Council  of Europe  has a strong  interest  in gaining  a strategic  overview  of these   developments.  Indeed,  whilst many  of the phenomena  described  are at a relatively  early  stage  of  development , it is essential  that policy  and civil society  respond  to the potential  undermining  of media   pluralism,  diversity , free expression , and media  independence  that they  represent.  Even  though  the  issues  raised  are transnational,  they  may  not apply  to all member  states  equally,  since  their  political,   economic  and social  differences  need  to be taken  into account.  Nevertheless , with this study  we aim  to provide  an analytical  framework  that can inform  the thinking  of the Council  of Europe  and its  member  states  in this complex  policy  area  and lay the ground  for future  policy  debates . 
      5   Within  this context , the aim of this report  is to provide  a fuller  understanding  of industry  practices  and  policy  needs  with  regard  to the prioritisation  of public  interest  content  online,  in order  to identify   potential  problems  with  the shift  to the internet  distribution.  Even  though  these  issues  broadly  concern   the cultural  and creative  sector  as a whole,  for the purposes  of this exploratory  and conceptual  study,   the focus  is primarily  on audiovisual  media  content  and news.  The research  is based  on a literature   review  of relevant  academic  research,  industry  and policy  publications  and on semi -structured  experts’   interviews , which  have  been  used  deepen  knowledge  and understanding  on specific  issues.1 The report   is structured  into four main  sections.  Firstly , we provide  a framework  for analysis  to inform  future  policy   debates  on the prioritisation  of public  interest  content . This framework  provides  definition s of key  concepts  contextualising  them  in current  policy  debates,  with  a specific  focus  on European  law  interventions  and Council  of Europe  recommendations  in this area.2 The section  is informed  by both   the literature  review  and insights  gathered  through  the interviews  and related  empirical  analysis .  Interviews’  data  have  indeed  enriched  all sections  of the report . The second  part of the study  focuses   on how  industry  practices  on content  prioritisation  online  are raising  new  challenges  for content   providers,  such  as broadcasters  and users . Thirdly , we discuss  the potential  issues  arising  from  current   industry  practices . These  include  freedom  of expression,  media  pluralism  and independence,   intermediaries’  transparency  and accountability,  and the sustainability  of local  and national  providers.   The report  will then  conclude  with  a reflection  on the role that regulatory  interventions  could  play to  address  some  of these  issues,  with particular  attention  to the role that the Council  of Europe  and its  standard -setting  instruments  could  have  in this area .    1. A Framework  for Analysis    1.1. Context  and Significance   Moderating  and filtering  out harmful  content , and curating  and prioritising  public  interest  content , are  two sides  of the same  coin, and they  are both  pivotal  for the future  developments  of our democ ratic   and information  systems  as they  impact  citizens’  freedom  of speech  and freedom  of reach  (Mandese,   2019) . In order  to assess  the implications  of prioritisation  for fundamental  rights  and democracy  we  need  to question  the role of new  gatekeeper s and investigate  who  decide s what  should  be made   relevant  to whom,  on what  basis . For instance,  in the context  of prominence  on electronic  programme   guides  (EPGs  ), empirical  evidence  shows  that a higher  ordinal  position  of a channel  on the EPG (near   the beginning)  is usually  associated  with  higher  audience  reach  and viewing  share , all else being  equal   (El-Husseini,  2010,  2013;  Expert  Media  Partners,  2018a;  Klein  et al., 2012;  OfCom,  2018) .3 Viewin g data   from  the Broadcasters'  Audience  Research  Board  (BARB ) on channel’s  reach  on Freeview,  Sky, and    1 Overall,  interviewees  included  a number  of representatives  from  different  stakeholders  ranging  from  industry  associations   to individual  organisations  involved  in the internet -distributed  audiovisual  media  value  chain,  like broadcasters,  pay-tv  operators,  and internet  platform  organisations.  The sampling  has been  done  through  a combination  of purposive  and  snowball  sampling,  which  were  used  to identify  and select  interviewees  based  on their  profile,  expertise  and functions   within  each  organisation.  More  information  on the methodology  can be found  in Annex  2.  2 A summary  of key terms  and definitions  used  throughout  this study  is also provided  in Annex  1.    3 This is supported  by a number  of UK-based  studies,  including  the reports:  (i) Technologia,  The value  and optimal   management  of channel  position  and prominence  on electronic  programme  guides:  A report  for DCMS,  4 July 2012;  (ii)  Attentional,  An Analysis  of the Audience  Impact  of Page  One EPG Prominence:  A report  for Ofcom,  July 2010;  and (iii) FEH  Media  Insight  An Analysis  of the Audience  Impact  of Page  One EPG Prominence:  A Report  for Ofcom,  29 April  2013;  (iv)  Ofcom,  A report  on the discoverability  of PSB and local  TV services,  27 June  2018;  (v) Experts  Media  Partners,  Report  on the  UK Market  in EPG Positions,  July 2018.  
      6   Virgin  Media  platforms  in the UK also confirm  this trend .4 These  data  show  that the reach  generally   decreases  as the EPG position  (i.e. the channel’s  number)  increases,  although  we should  take  into  account  that there  are also a number  of other  characteris tics of a channel  that affect  its performance,   such  as target  audience,  quality  of content , previous  audience,  and promotions  (Figure s 2 and 3).   Experimental  research  has demonstrated  that changes  in EPG position  can lead to changes  in the  audience : as you would  expect,  interfaces  and suggestion  impact  media  consumption  in predictable   ways.5  Moreover,  video -on-demand  (VOD)  and streaming  services  may  also enhance  the consumption  of  certain  films  and television  content  by actively  promoting  them  on their  home  pages  (Cabrera  Blázquez   et al., 2016:  18–19), or by personalising  the users’  interface  design  and highlighting  specific  catalogues   rows. Such  is the case  the “Netflix  Originals ” catalogue  row, which  tends  to be bigger  and more  visually   prominent  than other  programmes’  row, with  trailers  that automatically  play to attract  the viewers’   attention . Promotional  spots  on a video  service  interface  are usually  paid  by the distributors  and/or   rights  holders  of the film/TV  programme  and these  are highly  competitive  deals.  The European   Audiovisual  Observatory ’s report  on “The  Visibility  of film on on-demand  platforms  in Germany,  France   and the United  Kingdom”  has shown  that most  of the promotional  spots  were  allocated  to US films   (between  55%  and 57%),  whereas  European  films  are taking  between  30%  and 35%  of promotional   spots  (Fontaine,  2015:  8).   Further,  search  engines  and social  media  can also shape,  prioritise  and omit  certain  information  on  their  results  page,  and this has impact  on what  content  and information  are ultimately  accessed  by  users.  Already  in 2017,  people  were  increasingly  finding  their  content,  especially  news,  via search   engines  (20%)  and social  media  (25%)  services  offered  by US-based  internet  companies  like Google  and  Facebook  (Nielsen,  2017) . By 2019,  these  online  sources  had overtaken  television  in terms  of reach  for  “first  contact  with  news”  (Reuters  Institute,  2019) . These  digital  intermediar y services  have  become   integral  to how  people  find and access  content  all over  the world,  and the way they  rank,  organise  and  prioritise  content  has great  influence  on users.  Marketeers  and content  providers  are obsessed  with   search  engine  optimisation  (SEO)  techniques,  which  should  lead  them  to be in the first page  of a Google   search,  as users  are likely  to click  on the first set of results  (Mohsin,  2020;  Sterling,  2018) .   The impact  of content  prioritisation  decisions  was evident  and tangible  also during  the Covid -19 global   pandemic , whe n almost  all major  digital  intermediary  services  actively  promoted  fact-checked  and  high -quality  news  on this topic  and prioritis ed sources  considered  reliable  and trustworthy , such  as the  World  Health  Organisation,  national  Departments  of Health,  and national  PSM  organisations  (Figure s 3  and 4). The decision  to do so was taken  also to respect  the 2018  European  Code  of Prac tice on  Disinformation , where  signatories  recognised  the importance  of “diluting  the visibility  of disinformation   by improving  the findability  of trustworthy  content”  (European  Union,  2018 c: 3). This demonstrate s  that on the one hand,  these  services  have  the capability  to surface  authoritative  content  and make  an    4 For more  information  on the cited  companies:  a) Freeview  is the UK digital  terrestrial  television  platform,  operated  by DTV  Services  Ltd, as a joint  venture  between  the BBC,  ITV, Channel  4, Sky and transmitter  operator  Arqiva  (see  https://www.freeview.co.uk/);  b) Sky Group  Limited  is a British  media  and telecommunications  conglomerate,  which  is a  subsidiary  of Comcast,  with  operations  in the UK, Ireland,  Germany,  Austria,  Switzerland,  and Italy;  the company  is primarily   involved  in satellite  television,  producing  and broadcasting,  broadband  services  and streaming  service,  the latter  through   Now  TV (see https://www.sky.com/ ); c) Virgin  Media  is a British  telecommunications  company  which  provides  telephone,   television  and internet  services  in the UK, and since  2013,  it is a subsidiary  of Liberty  Global  plc, an international  television   and telecommunications  company  (see https://www.virginmedia.com/).   5 https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/57201/impact_of_epg_prominence.pdf   
      7   editorial  choice  when  curating  their  homepages,  results  rankings  and newsfeed ; and on the other  hand,   that this could  be facilitated  with  multi-stakeholder  collaboration  and regulatory  incentives .   Thus,  while still working  within  the Framework  of the First  Amendment  to the US Constitution,  which   prohibits  state  restrict ions on freedom  of expression , these  US-based  companies  have  implement ed a  soft form  of corporate  social  responsibilit y in the context  of content  curation  and prioritisation.  We  should  take  into account  that this was done  in a mome nt of global  emergency  and that positive   discrimination  was limited  to content  and news  related  to Covid -19, whereas  curation  and prioritisation   strategies  on other  topics  and matters  remained  unchanged . This prioriti sation  approach  takes  place  in  the context  of a wider  attention  econom y that values  emotional  resonance  and controversy  above  the  public  interest,  and independent  researchers  also found  that a large  spread  of Covid -19 related  mis-  and disinformation  during  this period.  The research  furthermore  found  that the audience  of “statebacked ” news  content  on Covid -19 was much  greater  than  that of independent  media  (Bright  et al.,  2020;  COMPROP,  2020) .6 However,  the same  was not true of streaming  and VoD services  like Amazon   Video  Prime  or Netflix.  Their  distribution  algorithm s and curation  strateg ies were not significantly   changed  or adapted  during  the Covid -19 pandemic.  Actually,  audience  and market  data  show  that what   surged  in popularity  and was surfaced  in some  users’  “Top  10” lists or as recommended  titles  on Netflix   were  movies  and TV fiction  shows  about  pandemics  and disasters  (Clark,  2020;  Sutton,  2020) .7   Figure  2. Freeview  3+ minute  weekly  reach  (%) by EPG position  – slot 1 to 999 (UK Market) . 8      6 State -backed  media  outlets  were  defined  by the authors  and collaborators  of the Computational  Propaganda  Coronavirus   Misinformation  briefings  as organi sations  that are either  directly  funded  by the state  or are editorially  managed  by their   governments.  For more  information , see the Weekly  Briefings  of the Oxford  University  Computational  Propaganda  Unit   https://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/posts/coronavirus -misinformation -weekly -briefings/.   7 It is unknown  to what  extent  the recommendations  of this type  of movies  were driven  by the popularity  amongst  the users ,  individuals ’ searches,  editorial  decisions,  changes  in the algorithms  or perhaps  a combination  thereof.    8 Source:  BARB,  average  3+ minute  weekly  reach  (%), individuals  (4+),  26/02/2018  - 03/06/2018.  Channel  slots  are based  on  EPG positioning  in England  as at the start of June  2018.  Source:  http://www.digitaluk.co.uk/channels/channel_listings   (accessed  8 June  2018).  Note  that weekly  reach  figures  are UK wide.  Where  values  are blank,  these  channels  are not  reported  by BARB.   
      8   Figure  3. Sky 3+ minute  weekly  reach  (%) by EPG position  – slot 101 to 199 (UK market).9     Figure  4. Google  Search  Engine  Results  Page (SERP)  for the query  “coronavirus”    (Source:  personal  users’  search) .            9 Source:  BARB,  average  3+ minute  weekly  reach  (%), individuals  (4+),  30/04/2018  - 03/06/2018.11  (Note  that we have  used   a shorter  time  period  for our analysis  of the Sky platform  as the EPG was reshuffled  at the start  of May  2018).  Channel  slots   are based  on EPG positioning  in the London  region  as at the start  of June  2018.  Source:  https://www.sky.com/tv -guide/   (accessed  8 June  2018).  Note  that weekly  reach  figures  are UK wide.  Where  values  are blank,  these  channels  are not  reported  by BARB.   
      9   Figure  5. Facebook’s  Covid -19 Information  Centre  (Source:  personal  Facebook  page ).       Figure  6. YouTube ’s first results  on covid -19 (Source:  personal  YouTube  account ).    
      10   In a nutshell,  the gatekeeping  power  that we examine  in this study  refers  to the control  of how  content   and information  is curated  online , for example  by selecting,  adding,  manipulating,  shaping,  deleting  or  personalising  such  content  on different  interfaces  and devices  (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020;  Laidlaw,   2010,  2012;  Tambini  and Labo,  2016) . In this sense , we can define  the internet  information  gatekeeper s  as the organisation s and digital  intermediary  service s that have control  over  the flow,  content , and  accessibility  of information  online  (Laidlaw,  2010,  2012;  Tambini  and Labo,  2016) . Relevant  examples   for the purposes  of this report  include  both  software  and hardware -based  services,  such  as video  and  audio  content  aggregators,  technology  manufacturers  of internet -connected  devices , search  engines ,  social  media , and app stores . With  their  content  policies  and prioritisation  processes , these  services   can influenc e to some  extent  consumers’  ability  to judge  what  is worth  accessing  and watching  (Laidlaw,   2010;  Tambini,  2016) . The internet  information  gatekeepers  can therefore  influenc e content  curation   activities  and related  prioritisation  processes , which  refer  to the range  of design  and algorithmic   decisions  that positively  discriminate  and promote  content , by making  it more  discoverable  or  prominent  on various  devices  and user  interfaces.    As we will further  argue,  these  gatekeepers  can award  priority  to certain  content  based  on private   interest  and purely  commercial  transactions , like prominence  for payment,  or promoting  content  that  is most  likely  to be selected  by audiences  or advertisers  or generate  the most  revenue  in the data   economy.  But increasingly,  stakeholders  ask whet her certain  categories  of content,  such  as “public   service ” media,  or “public  interest ” content,  or “quality  journalism”  should  be made  more  prominent   on new  platforms,  as they  were  on the traditional  ones . This important  area  of policy  is seen  as the new   frontier  in building  media  systems  resilient  to threats  of hate , disinformation  and private  censorship . In  this sense,  scarce  resources  of prominence  and attention  combined  with  the increasing  abundance  of  content  online  are making  the competition  for prominence  fiercer  in communications  markets.   However,  claims  to support  regulatory  intervention  on prioritisation  of content  are inherently   controversial . On the one hand,  an interv ention  to promote  the prominence  of certain  categories  of  content , based  on legal  obligations  or public  authority,  can be seen  as an unwelcome  intrusion  into the  domain  of free expression . It can be seen  as a threat  to the role and independence  of the medi a, and a  form  of soft propaganda  and soft censorship.  If such  decisions  are taken  under  pressure  from   government , obvious  questions  of media  freedom  arise.  On the other  hand , it can be seen  as a positive   intervention  to protect  rights  to receive  ideas,  media  pluralism  or the watchdog  role of the media.   Simply  leaving  the internet  gatekeepers  to self-regulate  might , in turn,  have  significant  implications  for  freedom  of expression,  especially  media  plurality  and independence  from  undue  private  interferences ,  as well as for social  inequalitie s.   In summary,  whilst  the freedom  of expression  implications  of content  takedown,  ‘privatised  censorship’   and down -ranking  of content  have been  much  discussed,  including  by the Council  of Europe10, curation   and prioritisation  and its implications  for free expression,  pluralism  and democracy  have  been  under   less scrutiny.  The response s of intermediar y services  during  the health  emergency  demonstrate  that  practices  are changing  very  fast.  These  services  are taking  decisions  about  which  sources  of information   should  be considered  trustworthy,  what  weight  of prominence  they  should  be given,  for whom,  and  thereby  they are exerting  a powerful  shaping  effect  on public  opinion.  Overall,  based  on the literature   review  and insights  gathered  from  the qualitative  interviews,  we argue  that decisions  over  content   prioritisation  are strongly  influenced  with  varying  degrees  by at least  four main  categories  of factors ,    10 See:  https://www.coe.int/en/web/freedom -expression   
      11   respectively  the regulatory  context , technological  architecture , users’  agency , and commercial   negotiations.  To develop  a framework  that can inform  future  policy  debates  in this area,  we will firstly   discuss  the relevant  regulatory  environment  (Section  1.2), while  the other  factors  will be analysed  in  the subsequent  sections  (see Section  2).  Table  1. Some  examples  of gatekeep ers and content  prioritisation  processes .  Type  of  gate keeper  Example  Content  prioritisation   processes  Regulatory   Framework  Definition  of public   Interest  Content   Device   manufacturer  Smart  TV set  provider  Channel  Priority,  EPG prominence,   location  of apps  on homepage,   dedicated  buttons  on remote   controls . Competition  law  framework;  PSB EPG  prominence  rules11;  AVMSD .12 Public  Service  Broadcasting   Video -ondemand  (VOD)   services13 TVOD:  Apple   iTunes   SVOD:  Netflix  Promoted  titles  (generally  in a  carousel  at the top of the home   screen) ; Recommendation  rows  and  titles;  personalised  user  interface;   catalogue’s  ranking  system  and  dedicated  subcategories  (to order   different  rows,  and within  the same   row),  popularity  rankings  (e.g.  “top   10” or “top  picks  for you”);  ‘up next’   features;  auto -play functions;  voice   and text keyword  search .   Self-regulation;  user   agreements,  EU  speech  codes,  duties   of care,  AVMSD.14 ‘Quality  content ’ ranked  on  the basis  of user  feedback ,  audience  data , and  consumptions  patterns .  Search  engine  Google  Search   Prominence  of search  results , ranking   systems  (within  the same  page,  and  between  different  pages);  dedicated   and sponsored  boxes . Self-regulation:  user   agreements,  EU  speech  codes,  duties   of care.  ‘Quality  journalism’ , factchecking  approval ; user   feedback ; popularity   rankings  (based  on clicks,   access  data  and audience   data) . (Exact  criteria   unknown).   Social  Media  Facebook  Flagging  and tagging,  ranking  of  newsfeed,  instant  articles,   recommendation  algorithm s,  personalised  user  interface . Self-regulation:  user   agreements,  EU  speech  codes,  duties   of care.   ‘Quality  journalism’ , factchecking  approval ; user s’  feedback , personal  settings   and preferences . (Exact   criteria  unknown).     11 PSB EPG prominence  rules  are extended  to smart  tv via regulatory  interventions  only  in certain  member  states  (such  as UK  and Germany),  whereas  in most  of the other  countries  this is not covered  with in regulation  yet.  12 The revised  AVMSD  proposes  an extension  of its European  works  and general  interest  content  provisions  to TV-like  services  and on VOD  service  but it is not prescriptive  and therefore  it is up to the EU member  states  to decide  how  to  proceed.  We are currently  still in the implementation  phase;  thus,  it is not clear  how  different  member  states  will transpose   these  provisions  into national  law.  13 Video  on demand  services  can be either  Transactional  VOD,  TVOD,  or Subscription  VOD  (SVOD).  TVOD are services  such  as  Apple’s  iTunes,  which  sell (also  called  electronic  sell-through  (EST))  or rent  films  and television  content  on a pay-per-view   basis.  TVOD  services  are basically  replacing  DVD  and Blu-ray sold in physical  stores  for retail  and rented  in video  clubs,  and  therefore  act as a digital  store  and video  club as consumers  pay their  purchase  or rental  fees on a pay-per-view  basis   (Cabrera  Blázquez  et al., 2016:  17–18)(Cabrera  Blázquez  et al., 2016) . SVOD  services  sell access  to a catalogue  of films,   television  content  and documentaries  against  a monthly  subscription  fee. These  services  are competing  more  directly  with   traditional  pay-tv services  for subscribers  and revenues,  and with  the physical  home  entertainment  market  as consumer   preferences  shift  from  ownership  to access  to audiovisual  content  (Cabrera  Blázquez  et al., 2016:  13–14). The market  for  SVOD  has rapidly  grown  in recent  years,  with  almost  every  player  in the market  launching  its own  SVOD.  Examples  are  Netflix,  Apple  TV+,  Amazon  Prime  Video  (which  has both  a SVOD  and TVOD  content  offer),  Disney+,  Sky Q, Britbox  (joint   venture  of UK PSB,  BBC,  ITV and Channel  4), and many  other  services  offered  by European  players.   14 See note  7. 
      12   1.2. Definitions  and Regulatory  Context     Although  the institutional  forms  and principles  may  vary  across  nations,  as communication  theorist   James  Michael  observed,  the regulation  of media  and communication  is “as old as blood  feuds  over   insults,  and…  as classic  an issue  as deciding  whose  turn  it is to use the talking  drum  or the ram’s  horn”   (Flew,  2018:  1; Michael,  1990:  40). In this perspective,  posing  questions  about  the public  interest  in  new  forms  of intermediation,  and how  and to what  extent  certain  forms  of information  should  be made   more  visible  and others  hidden,  are a normal  part of societal  evolution.  Currently,  onlin e content   curation  and related  prioritisation  decisions  are not covered  by a specific  regulatory  framework , but  EPGs  and cable  services  are covered  by legacy  broadcasting  and must -carry  rules . There  is also an  overall  lack of a coordinated  approach,  mainly  due to the fact that media  content  regulation  is under   national  jurisdiction  and therefore  often  differs  from  country  to country.  However,  as media   technologies  advance  and we move  towards  a globalised  and digitally  convergent  media  industry , it  becomes  more difficult  to strike  the right  balance  between  different  interests  and objectives  in this  area.  Thus, it is important  to provide  clarity  on how  we understand  the two key concepts  at the core  of  this report : what  is prioritisation , and what  is public  interest  content  in today’s  internet -distributed   media  industry ? This section  will provide  a framework  for these  notions  and it will contextualise  them   within  existing  regulatory  and policy  regimes.     Figure  7. Summary  of the two core  and intertwined  concepts  used  in the report.      Content prioritisation refers to the range of design and  algorithmic decisions that result in prominence and  discoverability of content •Prominence : the location of content and services on  internet intermediation services that are more or less  visible to the final users •Discoverability : the likelihood of discovery and the  related consumption of content, depending on industry  dynamics, strategies, negotiations and curation of  content. Prioritisation Public interest content is a normative definition of media  and information content that is produced by  organisations or providers that strive to achieve wider  social objectives •Public interest as an objective : ideal outcomes best serving a social collective  •Public interest as criteria : criteria that should be met to  achieve the ideal outcomesPublic interest content
      13   1.2.1.  Public  Interest  Content:  Tensions  and Criteria    The term  “public  interest”  is often  used  in European  media  regulation  but is highly  contested  and illdefined.  In the early  1990s,  Prof.  Denis  McQuail  identified  the term  “public  interest”  in the media   context  as “the  complex  of supposed  informational,  cultural  and social  benefits  to the wider  society   which  go beyond  the immediate,  particular  and individual  interests  of those  who  communicate  in public   communication,  whether  as senders  or receivers”  (McQuail,  1992:  3). Regulatory  interventions  are  justified  for a perceived  common  good  that is in the interest  of the community  as a whole,  even  when   that might  be against  the interest  of certain  private  individuals . The media  industries  such  as  broadcasting  have  historically  been  infused  with  an ethical  obligation  to serve  the public  interest,  an  obligation  that has been  transcribed  into media  policy  and regulation  (see for instance  Feintuck  and  Varney,  2006;  Napoli,  2015) .   While traditionally  we tend  to assume  that there  is a fundamental  public  interest  in media   communications,  this is difficult  to specify  and codify  into practice.  Indeed,  the ideal  of public  interest   has been  opera tionalised  into diverse  sets of criteria  and values , often  described  as public  value  criteria .  However,  there is no one commonly  shared  definition  of such  criteria  and there  are often  tensions  and  conflicts  between  them  as the claims  used  to support  them  are at best  vague  and malleable  (Feintuck   and Varney,  2006:  74–75; Tambini,  2001:  26). National,  regional  and international  policy makers  and  regulators  are constantly  attempting  to define  and operationalise  public  interest  into applicable  criteria   and assessment  frameworks , which  can be applied  to certain  categories  of content  and actors,  like the  public  interest  test set out in the UK Freedom  of Information  Act for public  service  media  (Information   Commissioner’s  Office,  2012)  or the UK public  interest  test for media  mergers15. However,  establishing   what  content  and/or  providers  can be considered  of public  interest  and therefore  being  granted  certain   regulatory  benefits,  like prominence,  is a site of contestation,  conflicting  interests  and contradictory   value  systems.  Further,  the notion  of public  interest  is sometimes  used  or seen  as an ideological  mean s  to limit  fundamental  liberties  of expression,  push  unjustified  regulatory  ambitions,  or grant  regulatory   benefits  to certain  actors  (McQuail,  1992) .   Such  restrictive  conceptions  do not find support  in the case -law of the European  Court  of Human  Rights   (“the  Court”)  which  has adopted  a wide  interpretation  of public  interest  in terms  of content  that can  be legitimately  published  or broadcast.  The ECtHR  applies  the concept  of “publi c interest”  as one of the  criteria  in the exercise  of balancing  different  conflicting  rights  and interests,  including  in many  cases   about  content -based  restrictions  of freedom  of expression  protected  by Article  10 of the Convention   for the Protection  of Human  Rights  and Fundamental  Freedoms  (“the  Convention”).  Generally,  the  Court  specifies  that the notion  of “public  interest”  relates  to matters  which  affect  the public  to such  an  extent  that it may  legitimately  take  an interest  in them , matters  which  attrac t its attention,  or which   concern  it to a significant  degree,  especially  in that they  affect  the well-being  of citizens  or the life of  the community.  This is also the case  regarding  matters  capable  of causing  considerable  controversy   and matters  that shoul d be brought  to the public’s  attention  since  they  concern  an important  social   issue,  or involve  a problem  that the public  would  have  an interest  in being  informed  about.16 Of course,     15 This is explained  in the following  reports:  https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/files/2016/01/LSE -MPP -Policy -Brief -14Monitoring -Media -Plurality -after -Convergence -FINAL.pdf ; and  http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/69847/1/LSE%20MPP%20Policy%20Brief%2018%20 -%20Media%20Plurality,%20the%20Fox Sky%20bid,%20and%20the%20case%20for%20referral%20to%20Ofcom.pdf.   16 The principles  on public  interest  are comprehensively  present ed in the Court’s  case  of Couderc  and Hachette  Filipacchi   Associés  v. France  [GC],  no. 40454/07,  ECHR  2015.  
      14   not all that is allowed  to be published  – meaning  what  is within  the legal  limits  of freedom  of expression   as laid down  in European  or international  law – need  be given,  or indeed  deserves  prominence.   The problem  for policymakers  is to translate  into regulation  a workable  definition  of public  interest   content,  with  related  criteria  and assessment  frameworks.  When it comes  to industry  practices  and  decisions  on content  prioritisation,  stakeholders  have  different  and contested  understanding s of what   content  is valuable  for them  and for consumers,  and therefore  what  should  be defined  as public   interest  content  on their  services , and what  should  be granted  a prominent  position . One of the most   common  definitions  of public  interest  content  associates  public  interest  content  with  content  produced   by public  service  media  (PSM)  organisations.  Indeed,  thanks  to the public  service  principles  of  independence,  pluralism,  universality , innovation  and quality  (European  Broadcasting  Union,  2017)    that have  been  translated  into PSM ’s remits  and legal  obligations , the content  produce d by PSM  has  often  been  recognised  to carry  some  sort of public  value,  intended  as value  for individuals,  industry  and  society  as a whole  (Benington,  2011;  Benington  and Moore,  2011) . Historically  though,  the prevailing   neo-classical  economic  thinking  has used  market  failure  arguments  to restric t this understanding  of  public  interest  content  primarily  to niche  market  failure  genres,  like news  and current  affairs,   documentaries,  educational  and cultural  programmes,  that are not as commercially  viable  as  entertainment  programmes.  In this view,  public  interest  content  is constructed  in economic  theory  as  ‘positive  externalities’  or ’public  goods’  that would  lead  to market  failure.  The inherent  limitations  of  neo-classical  economics  and market  failure  arguments  applied  to PSM  have  led to broader  tensions  in  the definitio n of public  interest  as an objective  for media  organisations  (Coyle  and Woolard,  2010;  Lowe   and Martin,  2013;  Mazzucato  and O’Donovan,  2016) . Codifying  it into criteria  that can be implemented   and assessed  has therefore  been  extremely  challenging  for both  industry  representatives  and  policymakers.    For example,  ahead  of the 2005  Charter  renewal,  the BBC was the first PSM  to operationalise  its public   interest  mission . It introduc ed the notion  of public  value  to the media  world  and establish ed criteria   that would  help  the organisation  to achieve  such  mission  with  its services  and content , including  by  external  regulation  via a ‘public  value  test’.  (Knoll,  2012;  Lowe  and Martin,  2013;  Spigelman,  2013) .  There  are actually  few public  bodies  where  the concept  is more  developed  than  the BBC,  with  its  enduring  mission  to “act in the public  interest,  serving  all audiences  through  the provision  of impartial,   high -quality  and distinctive  output  and services  which  inform,  educate  and entertain ”17. Within  the BBC,   public  interest  content  is therefore  understood  as content  that is of interest  and valuable  for each   individual  on the one hand,  but it also carries  broader  public  value  for the media  sector  and society  as  a whole  (Coyle  and Woolard,  2010;  Mazzucato  and O’Donovan,  2016) .   However,  using  PSM’s  channels  and services  as a proxy  for public  interest  content  has also been   criticised  as a narrow  and limiting  interpretation,  as it does  not include  other  media  organisations  and  content  providers  that engage  in this debate  and delive r social  and public  benefits  to citizens.  While  we  recognise  the importance  of PSM  organisations  in promoting  a favourable  environment  for quality   information  and ensur ing a diverse  breadth  of content,18 public  interest  content  is a wider  category   than  that produced  by legacy  PSMs.  A growing  number  of media  industry  representatives  are indeed   calling  for an expanded  and more  inclusive  notion  of public  interest  content,  which  acknowledges  that    17 BBC Charter , paragraph  5.  18 Council  of Europe  Draft  recommendation  on promoting  a favourable  environment  for quality  journalism  in the digital  age;  and Council  of Europe’s  Recommendation  Rec(2007)3  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on the remit  of  public  service  media  in the information  society.  
      15   also both  national  and international  organisations,  as well as both private  and public  actors,  can  contribute  to the production  and distribution  of public  interest  content  (Cairncross,  2019;  McDonald,   2018;  Netflix,  2020;  Ofcom,  2020;  Sky UK, 2018;  Sweney  and Conlan,  2019) . Interviewees  from  private   and commercial  media  organisations  have  indeed  shown  that they have  also developed  their  own   understanding  and criteria  to define  public  interest  content.  Few research  participants  have  also  highlighted  that economic  and public  interest s are not necessarily  opposed . On the contrary,  one can  be a by-product  of the other even  if the driving  rationale  is to keep  a stable  revenue  stream  and  customer  base  (Internet  platform  representative  1, 2020;  Pay-tv operator  representative  2, 2020 ;  Public  service  media  representative  4, 2020; Policymaker  representative  5, 2020 ).    “Well,  my fantasy  would  be that there  would  be more  funding  to invest  in original   content  that has a social  purpose,  rather  than  just a commercial  purpose.  And perhaps  even   support  with  platforms  like that.  I think  the concept  of public  service  broadcasting  could  possibly   be widened  to include  the grassroots  community  media  world  as well.”    (Community  media  representative  1, 2020)    “The  difference  [between  PSM  with  commercial  revenues  and private  broadcasters]  is  that they  have  a designation  and a particular  status  and some  obligations  in their  license  [to act  in the public  interest].  But actually,  all of us do things  of public  value  that we are not obliged  to  do at all. We do it because  there  is a happy  overlap  between  what  is in our economic  interests   and what  is in the public  interest , and I think  that actually  goes  for the vast majority  of what  we  do. And then  we do some  things  because  we feel that it is the right  thing  to do as an organi sation   as part of society.  We like to think  that we are part of the communities  that we provide  a service   to and that we gain  our living  from,  and that is our role to ensure  that we are responsible  and  give something  back.”   (Pay -tv operator  representative  2, 2020)    “I think  one possible  difference  between  how  a commercial  player  might  think  about  it  [i.e. public  interest  content]  and how  a PSM  should  be thinking  about  is that public  value  is kind  of a by-product  of what  we do. […] For a business  like ours,  our imperatives  are largely   commercial  ones,  but it happens  that there  is actually  a happy  marriage  because  what  we find,   as we grow,  is that for us to generate  the greatest  commercial  value , we actually  need  to  produce  some  kind of public  interest  content  or acquire  programming  that is in the broadest   possible  interest  to our audiences.  And by responding  to those  needs,  you might  argue  that we  are generating  some  public  value,  which  is not dissimilar  to what  the PSM  are doing,  even   though  the underlying  rationale  is a little  bit different.”   (Digital  intermediary  representative  1, 2020 ) 
      16   Further,  there  is growing  support  among  industry  representatives  and policymakers  for a criteria -based   approach  that does  not define  types  or genres  of programmes,  but it establishes  principles  and  technical  standards  that content  providers  should  respect  through  a co-regulatory  approach.  The most   advanced  proposal  to this effect  comes  from  the Journalism  Trust  Initiative  (JTI) which  is arguing  for  technical  standards  and public  interest  criteria  for journalism  that could  be agreed  and implemented   through  co-regulation  (News  media  representative  1, 2020) . Thus,  the JTI does  not call for a definition   or hierarchy  of content  per se, as labelling  content  or journalists  might  be misused  and turned  into  censorship  (News  media  representative  1, 2020) , but they  aim to set up technical  standards  that would   intervene  at the level  of the journalist  practice  and content  governance  system . This might  take  the  form  of criteria  that can be assessed  and measured  either  quantitatively  or qualitatively  and that should   be resp ected  by media  outlets  and internet  gatekeepers  in order  to ensure  that authoritative  and factchecked  sources  are granted  due prominence  on digital  intermediar y services , like social  media,  search   engines  and content  aggregators  (News  media  representative  1, 2020).Th e rationales  could  be  extended  also beyond  news  and it would  ideally  shape  the market  to create  a more  diverse  and  pluralistic  online  media  ecosystem  where  users  are exposed  and prompted  to consume  more  public   interest  content  (News  media  repre sentative  1, 2020).    “First  of all, I think  it is really  important  to state  that we are not talking  about  quality,   as this can really  be problematic.  I would  say that the objective  of public  interest  really  comes   down  to certain  benchmarks  in the manufacturing  level  of journalism  and this is very important,   but it is not doing  so by ranking  individual  pieces  of content  or individual  journalists,  as this could   be obviously  easily  misused  and turned  against  journalism  or journalists,  and turned  into  censorship.  It is more  about  the process  level  of journalistic  production  […].”   (News  media  representative  1, 2020)   In summary,  examples  like the JTI’s one show  a possible  definition  of public  interest  content  and related   criteria  that are based  on professional  standards , rather  than  content  standards . Professional  standards   can be based  on procedures  and professional  practices  that lie behind  the production  and distribution   of given  content,  rather  than  attempting  to differentiate  genres  or provider s ex ante , which  can be  misused.  Whilst  acknowledging  that there  is intense  disagreement  over  these  criteria  and how  they   should  be implemented,  whether  with  regulation,  co-regulation  or self-regulation,  there  is a broad   agreement  over  a principle -based  approach  that goes  beyond  evaluating  individual  programmes  or  genres . This approach  broaden s the categories  of media  organisations  that can act in the public  interest   through  their  content  and services  and should  therefore  be granted  due prominence.  Based  on the  interviews  and document  analysis , we have  summarised  in the table  below  those  criteria  that have   emerged  as relevant  to make  such  decisions  (see Table  2). By establishing  commonly  agreed  criteria   through  industry  or technical  standards,  we could  ideally  promote  good  industry  practices  while   respec ting media  freedom,  plurality  and freedom  of expression . Instead  of impos ing its judgment  over   specific  content  or providers , the regulator  would  collaborate  proactive ly with  industry  representatives   to achieve  thos e benchmarks .    
      17   Table  2. Examples  of relevant  criteria  for providers  of public  interest  content .19  Criteria  for providers  of public  interest  content   Cultural  or educational  mission  (incl.  libraries,  theatres  and museums)   Creation  of public  value  (incl.  societal,  individual  and industry  value )  High  consumption  and popularity  (e.g.  based  on audience  measurements  and viewing  figures)   High  coverage  of local,  regional  and national  topics , which  are deemed  relevant  for the broader   public,  such  as international  events,  business,  politics,  science,  technology,  etc.  High  coverage  and representation  of all audiences,  including  niche  audiences   High  degree  of accuracy,  fact-checking,  professional  standards  of journalism   High  degree  of diversity,  intended  in its broadest  sense  i.e. diversity  of content,  sources  and  exposure   High  degree  of independence  from  state,  private  and market  undue  interference    High  degree  of innovation  and originality   High  degree  of reliability  and trustworthiness   High  degree  of respect  for ethical  principles   High  degree  of transparency  of sources,  revenues,  and ownership    High  quality   High  standards  of transparency  or accountability  to the public   Public  media  institution,  such  as public  service  media  organisations / public  ownership   Universal  reach  and distribution     1.2.2.  Content  Prioritisation   In this study , content  prioritisation  refer s to the range  of design  and algorithmic  decisions  and processes   that positively  discriminate  and promote  content  by making  it more  discoverable  or prominent  on  different  devices  and related  user  interfaces.  Prominence  and discoverability  are therefore  two  interlinked  outcomes  of prioritisation  processes.  To better  understand  the implications  of current   industry  practices  in this area , we should  therefore  clarify  and contextualise  two key aspects  of  prioritisation,  namely  prominence  and discoverability.     19 Examples  of criteria  gathered  from  the interviews  and the literature  review  of relevant  industry  standards,  code  of  practice,  and European  media  law and Council  of Europe  Recommendations.  The criteria  are listed  in alphabetical  order  and  they  are not considered  to be hierarchical.  The table  therefore  presents  an overview  of public  interest  criteria  that a  provider  should  strive  to achieve in order  to be recognised  as a provider  of public  interest  content,  and as such  could   therefore  benefit  from  prioritisation  processes.   
      18   1.2.3.  Prominence    Prominence  is an outcome  of content  prioritisation  processes  and it concerns  the “physical ” i.e. virtual   or visual  location  and prioritised  placement  of a channel /app/service  compared  to others  in time   and/or  space  on a given  interface . Thus,  it concerns  the degree  to which  certain  kinds  of channels  and  services  (and  therefore  content)  stand  out from  others  in electronic  programme  guides,  video   interfaces,  catalogues’  listing , etc. (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020:  389) . From  a regulatory  perspective,   prominence  rules  are part of traditional  content  regulation  instruments  that have  a positive  or  promotional  approach , rather  than  a negative  or prohibitory  one.  Generally,  positive  content   regulations  may  require  that content  providers  commission  and produce  a certain  amount  of locally   produced  material  and public  interest  content,  while  distributors  ensure  that such  content  is delivered   effectively  to audiences.  Positive  discrimination  is needed  for such  programmes  because  they are  deemed  to carry  public,  social,  and cultural  values  for citizens . At the same  time,  this content  usually   has a low return  on investment  and low audience  reac h, and therefore,  if simply  left to the free market ,  these  programmes  might  slowly  disappear , as it partially  happened  with  the shift  to multi -channel   digital  distribution  (Bergg,  2004;  Cowling  and Tambini,  2002;  Tambini,  2004) .   Within  the European  Union  area,  this type  of positive  discrimination  has been  translated  into  safeguards  to support  specific  types  of content  and providers,  such  as PSM’s  channels  and Euro pean   works.  The two main  positive  safeguards  are must -carry  and appropriate  prominence  obligations . The  former  refers  to the obligation  for electronic  communication  networks  to transmit  and distribute   specified  television  and broadcast  services , which  is established  by the recently  revised  European   Electronic  Communications  Code  (European  Union,  2018b) . The latter , however,  refers  to the  Audiovisual  Media  Services  Directive  (AVMSD) , which  recognises  member  states’  freedom  to adopt   rules  that ensure  an “appropriate”  prominent  positioning  of audiovisual  media  services  of “general   interest ” (Article  7(a),  Recital  25 AVMSD ), and of European  works   (Article  13(1),  Recital  35 AVMSD ) on  linear  television  (European  Union,  2010,  2018a) .20 Since  its most  recent  revision,  these  provisions  have   been  extended  also to video  on demand  (VoD) services  (European  Union,  2018a) . However,  member   states  are still in the process  of adopting  their  national  prominence  frameworks  and there  are    20 The quoted  articles  and recitals  recite  as follows:   • Recital  25: “Directive  2010/13/EU  is without  prejudice  to the ability  of Member  States  to impose  obligations  to ensure   the appropriate  prominence  of content  of general  interest  under  defined  general  interest  objectives  such  as media   pluralism,  freedom  of speech  and cultural  diversity.  Such  obligations  should  only  be imposed  where  they  are necessary   to meet  general  interest  objectives  clearly  defined  by Member  States  in accordance  with  Union  law. Where  Member   States  decide  to impose  rules  on appropriate  prominence,  they  should  only  impose  proportionate  obligations  on  undertakings  in the interests  of legitimate  public  policy  considerations.”   • Recital  35: Providers  of on-demand  audiovisual  media  services  should  promote  the production  and distribution  of  European  works  by ensuring  that their  catalogues  contain  a minimum  share of European  works  and that they  are given   sufficient  prominence.  The labelling  in metadata  of audiovisual  content  that qualifies  as a European  work  should  be  encouraged  so that such  metadata  are available  to media  service  providers.  Prominence  involves  promoting  European   works  through  facilitating  access  to such  works.  Prominence  can be ensured  through  various  means  such  as a dedicated   section  for European  works  that is accessible  from  the service  homepage,  the possibility  to search  for European  works   in the search  tool available  as part of that service,  the use of European  works  in campaigns  of that service  or a  minimum  percentage  of European  works  promoted  from  that service's  catalogue,  for example  by using  banners  or  similar  tools.   • Article  7(a):  “Memb er States  may  take  measures  to ensure  the appropriate  prominence  of audiovisual  media  services   of general  interest”.   • Article  13(1):  Member  States  shall  ensure  that media  service  providers  of on-demand  audiovisual  media  services  under   their  jurisdiction  secure at least  a 30 % share  of European  works  in their  catalogues  and ensure  prominence  of those   works.   
      19   significa nt differences  in the implementations  of the AVMS  Directive . For instance , with regard  to the  attractive  presentation  and prominence  of European  works,  only  5 countries  (6 with  the French   Community  of Belgium)  have  introduced  an explicit  and mandatory  obligation  to give visibility  to EU  works  in the catalogues  of on-demand  AVMS  (Figure  8).  The rationales  and policy  objectives  guiding  the European  law provisions  on prominence  are described   as public  interest  objectives  of media  pluralism,  freedom  of expression  and media  diversity  (European   Union,  2018:  72–73). Interestingly,  the latter  was intended  not only  as content  and source  diversity  but  also as exposure  diversity  (Helberger  et al., 2018;  Napoli,  2011),  as the text prescribes  that availability   of diverse  outlets  and programmes  is not sufficient  nowadays  and that prominence  obligations  should  intervene  also at the level  of search  and access.  Thus,  to ensure  a diverse  and pluralist  media   environment,  media  policy  frameworks  have  introduced  these  measures  of positive  discrimination  for  “general  interest ” or “public  interest”  services.  These  provisions  though  are not prescriptive,  and  contrarily  to other  rules  contained  in the AVMSD,  it is optional  for member  states  to regulate  this  matter . At the moment  of writing,  most  existing  national  prominence  frameworks  apply  mainly  to linear   broadcasters  and distributors,  which  do not reflect  the changing  landscape  of our contemporary  media   system  and the role that digital  intermediaries  play in it.   Even  though  policy  debate s in this area  are still an early  stage  (Policymaker  representative  4, 2020) ,  European  policymakers  have  recently  announced  their  interest  in launching  far-reaching  overhaul  of  online  content  rules  (Espinoza,  2020)  and questions  around  the prominence  of public  interest  content   on digital  intermediary  services  have  been  explicitly  addressed  in the European  Commission’s  public   consultation  on the Digital  Service  Act (European  Commission,  2020) .21 Further,  Europe -wide  bodies   like EPRA , the European  Platform  of Regulat ory Authorities , and ERGA,  the European  Regulators  Group   for Audiovisual  Media  Services , are examining  similar  issues  but with  a particular  focus  on the impacts   of gatekeepers  and prominence  respectively  on media  pluralism (EPRA,  2020)22 and on news  content   and journalism  (ERGA,  2020a) .23 Despite  these  ongoi ng debates , concrete  regulatory  proposals  at  member  states ’ level  have  only  been  advanced  by the United  Kingdom  and Germany  (see information   boxes),  while  the Council  of Europe  has developed  a Draft  Recommendation  on promoting  a favourable   environment  for quality  journalism  in the digital  age24, which  include s a guideline  on due prominence   for public  interest  journalism.  Thus,  it is evident  that there  is an interest  and a need  to revise  and adapt   the regulatory  framework  in this area . In doing  so, policymakers  and regulators  need  to address  a  number  of crucial  questions  regarding :  • the “appropriate”  degree  of prominence  on different  online  interfaces ;   • the enforce ment  and monitoring  mechanisms  required;    • the types  of devices  and digital  intermediar y service s that should  be covered ;   • the extent  to which  regulation  should  intervene  at the level  of search  and recommendation   systems  without  impact ing freedom  of expression  and freedom  of choice .     21 To access  the full survey  of the public  consultation,  see: https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/runner/Digital_Services_Act.   22 For more  information  on the current debate  within  the EPRA  network,  listen  to the podcast  panel  on “Media  plurality  in  the age of algorithms”  accessible  here:  https://shows.acast.com/epra/episodes/media -plurality -in-the-age-of-algorithms   23 For more  information  on the current  debate  within  the ERGA  network,  see their  response  to the European  Commission   DSA consultation:  https://erga -online.eu/wp -content/uploads/2020/06/ERGA_SG1_DSA_Position -Paper_adopted.pdf .  24 To access  the full text of the Draft  Recommendation,  pending  adoption  by the Council  of Europe’s  Committee  of  Ministers,  see: https://rm.coe.int/msi -joq-2018 -rev7 -e-draft -recommendation -on-quality -journalism -finalis/168098ab76 . 
      20    “Prominence  online  is one of the biggest  and thorniest  issue s. The question  is what  does   it actually  look like?  […] How  does  that translate  into those  promotional  areas  or content  aggregation   areas  before  downloading  an app?  Or how  does  that work  across  devices?  It is quite  easy  in an EPG  world  – you are just [a] number  […] on the on the EPG.  But there  are problems  in the digita l space.  […]  and you not only have  to get companies  to pick that [i.e. your  service/channel/app]  up, but you have  got to figure  out how  you want  that presented,  and then  how  you monitor  that,  especially  with  areas   like personali sation .”   (Public  service  media  representative  8, 2020)    “It is quite  interesting  to see that in terms  of the hierarchy  of policy  issues,  this [i.e. prominence]   has absolutely  been  a central  priority  for us over  the last couple  of years,  and in every  engagement  we  have  had with  policymakers , we said “this  is the number  one thing  that we need  to talk about.  […] If  digital  and online  media  is the future  that we want  to get to, then  it really  matters  that people  can find  us, because  if people  are consuming  only in an on-demand  space  on their  smart -TVs and if they  do not  see us, we are not prominent  in their  lives,  they  will just go an watch  Netflix  or Amazon  or whatever   provider  has paid  for that prominence.  Therefore,  our brand  gets  eroded  and our relationship  with  young   people  gets eroded,  and we cannot get that back.  This is also why this issue  [i.e. prominence]  has become   a priority  across  the organisation,  because  once  you lose that relationship , that brand  relationship  and  that trust, it is very difficult  to get back  to the same  level .”   (Public  service  media  representative  1, 2019)   Figure  8. Mandatory  and optional  prominence  obligations  in the European  Union  (EU 28).25      25 Source:  (i) European  Audiovisual  Observatory  AVMSD  Database;  (ii) Europe an Audiovisual  Observatory,  VOD,  platforms   and OTT:  which  promotion  obligations  for European  works?  2016,  pp. 48-49.  
      21   Germany: the Inter -State Media Treaty   In Germany, measures addressing intermediaries and platforms to promote diversity and regulate  opinion forming  power are implemented as behavioural duties in media regulation, and the central  instrument is the Rundfunkstaatsvertr ag (RStV) or Interstate Broadcasting Treaty, which is currently  being updated and rebranded as the new Medienstaatsvertrag, the Inter -State Media Treaty  negotiated between the German Länder (MStV) (Hartmann and Holznagel, forthcoming).  Intermediary regulat ion in Germany has been part of the RStV since 2000, when the Treaty sought  to regulate distributors like cable TV operators, which controlled the gateways and access points to  consumers. Subsequent amendments broadened the scope to cover aggregators in ga tekeeper  positions, which have led to the inclusion of certain types of platforms in the latest MStV. The overall  objective of this new regulation is to have both negative and positive safeguards to secure pluralism  through non -discrimination and findabili ty and prominence of general interest content (Article 84  MStV). These obligations are applied also to internet gatekeepers, therefore covering both  broadcasting and broadcasting -like services, as well as software -based applications that serve  primarily to provide access to such content (Medienstaatsvertrag, 2019) . The German proposal  innovates in  several ways. Firstly, the starting point is to privilege neutrality and non -discrimination,  which implies that in the absence of legitimate reasons, similar services and conte nt items may not  be discriminated against in relation to their order and location on the user interface. Secondly, they  introduce a two -tiered form of positive discrimination of content through a “must -be-found” rule  that prescribes the following:  a) all b roadcasting content must be prominently placed and easily  accessible within the interface,  and b) within the available broadcasting content, programmes of PSB  and private programmes that contribute to plurality must be placed more prominently than other  broadcasting programmes (Article 84 MStV) . Prominence therefore prevails over the neutrality and  non-discrimination principles when it comes to  the content of public interest. The determination of  public interest content is not ex -ante limited to PSB channel s and services, but it is delegated to the  media regulatory authorities, with considerations such as the proportion of political and regional  news, accessibility and the quota of European works (Hartmann and Holznagel, forthcoming).     UK: EPG Prominence Rules   In the UK, the question of prominence in a linear television industry was firstly introduced in 1997  by the former media regulator, the Independent Television Commission (ITC), to deal with a question  of abundance of offerings and ensure diverse and qualit y programming (Van Der Sloot, 2012: 139).  Subsequently, the Communications Act 2003 required Ofcom to draw a more detailed Code of  Conduct for “appropriate prominence” permitting measures of positive discrimination in favour of  linear public service broadc asting channels (Ofcom, 2010) . Thus, while initially the rationale was the  equal division of scarce transmission capacity, later it was also the fear that commercial broadcasters  would not serve those commercially unattractive groups and minorities and provide the desired  diversity of content  (Mazzoli, 2020b; Van Der Sloot, 2012) . The EPG Code is currently unde r revision,  and in July 2019 Ofcom proposed the extension of the rules to keep PSB prominent also on on demand services, across a range of “connected TV platforms” (smart TVs, set -up-boxes, and  streaming sticks) (Ofcom, 20 19). Even though it is unclear whether the UK Government will intervene  with primary legislation, Ofcom’s proposal shows the advantages and limitations of a new legislative  and regulatory framework informed by traditional media law instruments (i.e. EPG prominence 
      22   rules) . On the one hand, this proposal ensures easy access and enhanced visibility of PSB content  and apps  on all those services that a significant number of viewers use as one of their main ways of  watching TV content  (Ofcom, 2019: 1 , 4). The regime  therefore supports the relevance and presence  of PSM, which are recognised also by the Council of Europe as pillars of our democratic societies , as  they uphold the fundamental right to freedom of expressio n and information and contribute to a  diverse and pluralistic media environment (see Annex 2 – Rec(2007)3).26 On the other hand, the  proposed regime  does not address the deeper structural changes that the media industry is  undergoing and that are impacting  PSM and local providers alike. However, Ofcom has highlighted  that this framework should be flexible so that it can  adapt to technological innovation and changes  in viewer behaviours , and that it should include  order -making powers for the Secretary of State to  adapt the framework without the need for further primary legislation.  Finally, the new framework  should protect prominence of not only the PS M’ apps and online players (such as BBC iPlayer, All4,  and ITV),  but also PS M’s content that is distributed outside the player environment in this more  ‘disaggregated’ way. In this sense , issues related to the prioritisation of public interest content online  are primarily dealt with interventions in  media content policy and public service broadcasting  regulation .  Council of Europe : promotion of public interest journalism   The Council of Europe is working on a draft Recommendation on promoting a favourable  environment for quality journalism in the digital age, which includes a guideline specifically on d ue  prominence . While the details of the text may still undergo changes in the process of adoption , the  underlying objective is to guarantee e ffective access and visibility to quality media content to all  individuals, irrespective of income levels and any other barriers . To that end, the Council of Europe  recommends that independent and transparent self -regulatory media initiatives, open to multi stakeholder participation, should develop criteria for identifying reliable content that could be  applied, whether through hum an or automated means, in the process of media distribution and  consumption. It further argues that o nline platforms and other relevant digital  intermediar y services  should make use of those criteria to promote compliant providers of news and quality journ alism,  for which purpose they should continually improve their internal processes and operations, including  by ensuring their enhanced transparency.     1.2.4.  Discoverability   Another  key term  used  in recent  policy  debates  on content  prioritisation  is discoverability .  Discoverability  can be understood  as an outcome  of prioritisation  processes , but it concerns  the  likelihood  of discovery  of content,  and therefore  the likelihood  of its consumption , depending  on  industry  dynamics , negotiations  and organisational  strategies  (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020;  Mazzoli,   2020b) . It therefore  draws  attention  to the relations  between  institutions  and how  they  might  influenc e  the discovery  of certain  content  by audiences.  As audiovisua l content  increasingly  moves  online,  media   industry  experts  hail “content  discoverability”  as the next  biggest  challenge  for content  creators  and  providers , as the competition  over  audience’s  attention  becomes  fiercer  (Desjardins,  2016a:  10;    26 Council  of Europe’s  Recommendation  CM/Rec(2007)3  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on the remit  of  public  service  media  in the information  society.  
      23   McKelvey,  2016) . Typically,  in industry  discourses,  discoverability  is therefore  seen  as a problem  for  content  creators  to find an audience  for their  services,  applications  or programmes,  within  an  abundance  of choice  and an increasingly  comp etitive  and globalised  market.  In this context,  the rise of  new  internet  gatekeepers  has a significant  impact  over  the existing  power  structures  in the industry,   giving  rise to new  aspects  of control  and dependence  and a handful  of powerful  actors  whose  services   act as gateways  to content  (Evens  and Donders,  2018;  McKelvey  and Hunt,  2019;  Moore  and Tambini,   2018) .   From  a regulatory  perspective , issues  of content  discoverability  speak  more  of structural  problems  of  our contemporary  media  environment  that go beyond  content  regulation , as they  concern  competition   law, media  ownership  and concentration  rules,  and transparency  obligations . In particular,   discoverability  concerns  how  different  actors  can exert  more  or less control  over  a users’  journey  to  content  and the serendipitous  discovery  of content  online  (Mazzoli,  2020b) . In othe r words,  who  gets  to decide  what  content  is deemed  worthy  - economically,  culturally,  or socially  - to the final  users , and  therefore  should  be easier  to discover . In this sense,  investigating  how  different  organisations   participate  more  or less unequally  in such  decision -making  processes  is important  as it ultimately   reflect s whether  there  is a lack of level  playing  field  between  them.  Thus,  some  of the issues  that should   be looked  at when  considering  any regulatory  intervention  in this area  concern  intermediaries ’  accountability  and responsibility  over  content  distribution ; potentially  anti-competitive  behaviours  and  uneven  bargaining  power  over  commercial  negotiations;  transparency  over  organisational  decisions   and media  ownership ; and impacts  on a plurality  of media  organisations  independent  from  undue   private  and market  interference  (Mazzoli,  2020b) .   As also highlighted  in the Council  of Europe  Recomm endation  on media  pluralism  and transparency  of  media  ownership  (see Annex  2)27, to ensure  a plurality  of voices  and diversity  of content  online ,  including  public  interest  content , we need  to consider  a variety  means . These  include , but are not  limited  to, enhanc ing exposure  diversity  (Helberger  et al., 2018;  Napoli,  2011)  and improv ing  transparency  of automated  processes  (Guideline  2); implementing  media -ownership  regulation  that  restricts  horizontal,  vertical  and cross -media  ownership ; and enforcing  effective  competition  law to  prevent  the concentration  of power  and control  over  content  and informa tion in the hands  of few  powerful  actors  (Guideline  3). With  regard  to the latter  though,  it should  be noted  that problems  do  not simply  stem  from  ineffective  enforcement  of existing  media  ownership  and competition  rules , but  it is necessary  to rethink  the way competition  policy  can be applied  to today’s  internet  gatekeepers . An  increasing  number  of researchers  have  indeed  highlighted  the limitations  of current  competition   regimes,  calling  for new  approaches  that are more  suitable  to our contemporary  media  environment   (see for instance  Coyle,  2018;  Evens  and Donders,  2018;  Moore  and Tambini,  2018;  Wu, 2018) . Thus,   when  addressing  the politics  of discoverability,  policymakers  need  to acknowledge  the multiple  ways   in which  policy  solutions  – on com petition  and content  regulation;  on tax and on social  externalities  -  are interwoven,  and require  solutions  that will depend  on broad  cross -party  and civil society  support   (Tambini  and Moore,  2019) .        27 Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)1  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on media  pluralism  and transparency   of media  ownership.  
      24   Canada:  proposed intervention s on discoverability of Canadian content   The Canadian Broadcasting and Telecommunication Legislative Review Panel highlighted the  necessity to support “production and discoverability” of Canadian content online with the intent to  ensure “Canada’s cultural sovereignty and democracy” (ISED Canada, 2020:  9). To do  that, they  recommend  a number of intertwined measures, including  the needs to : a) introduce discoverability  obligations to positively discriminate Canadian content on all audio and audiovisual  entertainment  media services, through for instance exhibition requirements, prominence obligations, must -offer  and algorithmic transparency (ISED Canada, 2020: 147 –148) ; b) introduce  funding quotas for both  producers and distribu tors to ensure sustained investment in Canadian content that reflects the  diversity of languages, ethnicities and cultures of the Canadian population  (127 -128) ; c) revise   intermediaries ’ responsibilities  and liabilities in view of their changing role in cu rating and  aggregating content online ( 130-131) ; d) revise and update ownership rules to redefine the current  media and telecommunication ecosystem  (62-64). These recommendations come from  an  independent review panel;  thus, they are not part of any regulatory proposal at the moment,  but  they are  under discussion  in the context of a broader revision of the broadcasting and  telecommunication legislative framework .   Australia : proposed promotion and discoverability requirements for Australian content   In April 2020, t he Australian Government has released the “Supporting Australian stories on our  screens options paper ”, co-authored by Screen Australia and the ACMA at the request of government  in response to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission’s Digital Platforms Inquiry   (ACMA, 2020) . The paper is part of the government’s media reform agenda  and i t concerns potential   content obligations of free -to-air television broadcasters examining  whether there should be  Australian content obligations , such as promotion and discoverability requirements on VOD services.   The paper outline d several options, ranging from keeping the status quo to deregulation. These are  designed to prompt industry feed back to assist in the development of a regulatory framework that  promotes the government’s intent to support Australian stories on our screens. It is anticipated that  these matters will be explored in consultations with the industry.  Despite the initial as pirations of  this paper  of the Austral ian media industry stakeholders , the Australian government has in the end  opted for deregulation, reinstating sub -quota requirements on commercial broadcasters but in a  much more flexible and less prescriptive way and without addressing any of the issues around  discoverability requirements for Australian content  (Fletcher, 2020) . There are plans to increas e  public support for Australian content  with additional funding, however, they do not intend to  intervene in the sphere of exposure diversity and “t he market will determine where this content is  best shown, be it on commercial television, the ABC or SBS, subscription television or streaming  platforms ” (Fletch er, 2020) . It therefore emerg es the presumption that increasing diversity of  content and sources will a s a consequence promote diversity of exposure . However, scholars of  selective exposure have argued that this is not often the case ; on the contrary, given the abundance  of choice in today’s globally convergent media ecosystem, users might tend to be exposed, more or  less voluntarily, to less diverse content . Without the right incentives in place, this tendency could be  exacerbated by current industry dynamics (Helberger, 2018; Helberger and Moeller, 2018; Möller et  al., 2018).  
      25   2. A Changing  Landscape:  Industry  Practices  and Implications    As mentioned  in the introduction,  this study  addresses  issues  that concern  the cultural  and creative   industries  as a whole,  but for the purposes  of this exploratory  and conceptual  report  we have  primarily   focused  on audiovisual  media  content  and news,  which  present  specificities  and sensitivities  that are  particularly  relevant  for the policy  debate  on prioritisation  of public  interest  content.  Within  this  context,  media  distributors  and content  providers  have  always  had the power  to influence  audiences’   viewing  experiences,  and to do so, they  have  long  had to negotiate  with  other  stakeholders  for access   to audiences’  attention.  Mechanisms  to channel  viewer’s  attention  and to establish  different  forms  of  conditional  access  to content  began  already  with  practices  of scheduling  that were  represented  in  printed  channel  listing  and then  significantly  developed  through  Electronic  Programme  Guides  (EPG)  in  the 1990s  and 2000s.  The telecommunication  sector  and its regulatory  regime  has also influenced  the  ways  in which  content  was accessed  via Internet  Serv ice Providers,  through  for instance  zero -rating   practices  which  were  positively  discriminating  certain  services  over  others.28 In Net Neutrality   regulation,  the concepts  of “reasonable  network  management”  and “justified  traffic  management”   have  been  seen  as one means  of ensur ing priority  distribution  for public  interest  content.  However,   nowadays  media  markets  are experiencing  a period  of drastic  change  and development  as the  penetration  and quality  of broadband  has improved,  providing  a high -quality  distribution  platform  of  audiovisual  media  services  alongside  digital  terrestrial  television  (DTT),  cable  and satellite.  Thus,  even   though  significant  audience  segments  continue  to watch  linear  television,  others  consume  only  internet -distributed  services,  or a combination  of both.  Indeed,  the increasing  availability  and  popularity  of internet -connected  devices,  from  smart -TVs to smartp hones  and tablets , is multiplying   users’  routes  to content.  At the same  time,  the rise of on-demand  and streaming  services  is not only  allowing  users  to have  access  to a much  broader  range  of content,  from  both  national  and international   players,  but it is profoundly  changing  the way content  is distributed  and aggregated  through  different   screens  (Figure  9).       28 Zero -rating  is the practice  of providing  Internet  access  without  financial  cost under  certain  conditions,  such  as by  permitting  access  to only  certain  websites  or by subsidizing  the service  with  advertising  or by exempting  certain  websites   from  the data  allowance.  
 Figure  9. Internet -distributed  audiovisual  media  industry:  illustrative  supply  chain  with  examples  taken  from  the UK media  market  (Mediatique,  2020:  13).29        29 © Mediatique  Ltd 2020.   
      27   Even  though  audience  fragmentation  varies  from  country  to country  (European  Audiovisual   Observatory,  2019)  people  are generally  faced  with  an abundance  of content  and a growing  array  of  technologies  and services  through  which  they  can discover  content  (Johnson  et al., 2020) . On the one  hand,  this mix of distribution  technologies  and aggregation  services leads  to viewing  experiences  that  are governed  and controlled  by a range  of devices,  web  browsers,  video  interfaces  and apps   (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020:  387) . On the other  hand,  companies  owning  such  crucial  digital   intermediar y service s are also rapidly  expanding  their  services  along  the value  chain , as they  seek  endto-end vertical  integration  to secure  control  over  the ways  in which  content  is distributed  and circulated   online  (Figure  10). Indeed , major  global  players  like Google  Alphabet,  Amazon  and Apple,  have  been   the main  driver s of integration  in the connected  TV marketplace , achieving  strategic  partnerships  with   content  providers  as well as manufacturers,  or integrating  their  own  service  offer  in valuable  areas   (Mediatique,  2020:  46). In this context,  these  changes  in industry  structures  have  also an impact  on  who  has the power  to decide  over  content  curation  and prioritisation  processes , and ultimately  who   can exercise  control  over  users’  access  to content  on different  devices.  Based  the literature  review  and  insights  gathered  from  the qualitative  interviews , we have  identified  four main  categories  of factors   that can influence  content  prioritisation  processes  with  varying  degrees : (i) regulatory  context , (ii)  technological  architecture;  (iii) users’  agency;  and (iv) commercial  negotiations . Since  the previous   section  contextualises  the policy  debate  on prioritisation  of public  interest  content  within  the  regulatory  environment  (see Section  1.2.),  the following  section  will discuss  the other  three  factors .   
 Figure  10. Illustration  of end-to-end vertical  integration  and synergies  across  the audiovisual  media  value  chain  at various  companies30            30 The graph  has been  made  by the authors  based  on data  and information  gathered  from  Ofcom’s  industry  reports  (Mediatique,  2020;  MTM  and Ofcom,  2019)   
      29   2.1. Technological  Architecture    Individuals  do not make  choices  in a vacuum , but they  make  them  in a technological  environment  that  is not neutral  and where  many  features  of both  hardware  and software  components  can influence  their   decisions , as they  are confronted  every  day with  a myriad  of choices  and cues . The myth  of neutrality   of digital  intermediar y services  has been  debunked  and it is now  widely  recognised  that such  services   and their  technological  architecture  play a significant  role in shaping  what  content  and information  is  made  more  or less visible  online  (see for instance  Bucher,  2012,  2018;  Gillespie,  2010,  2018;  Roberts,   2019;  Woodard  and Jason,  2008;  Yeung,  2017) . Research  has shown  that the design  of hardware  and  software  technologies  inevitably  carries  certain  biases,  which  in turn  are related  to the objectives  of  the designers  and the interests  of the organisation s behind  them  (e.g. Möller  et al., 2018;  Napoli,  2014;   Powell,  2016) . Thus,  human  autonomy  and freedom  is inevitably  constrained  when  it comes  to content   prioritisation , because  prioritising  a service  or a provider  over  others  is a deliberate  decision  and it  constitutes  to some  extent  a form  of influence  and censorship.  We should  therefore  always  reflect  and  investigate  on what  basis  something  is being  prioritised,  why,  by whom  and for whom .   When  it comes  to content  prioritisation  online,  there  are different  factors  and aspects  that should  be  taken  into account . Given  the growing  complexity  of the content  supply  chain,  these  factors  also vary  depend ing on the influence  of different  gateways  that intervene  along  the supply  chain,  from  the  aggregation  services  level  to the hardware  and software  level  of the device s used  to access  content   (Desjardins,  2016a,  2016b;  Johnson  et al., 2020;  Mediatique,  2020 ; MTM  and Ofcom,  2019) .  Furthermore,  the technological  architecture  that shapes  users’  choice  is not simply  influenced  by a  technical  necessity,  but also by the interests,  strategies  and objectives  of the organi sations  that are  developing  it (Napoli,  2014) . Broadly  speaking , examples  of this technological   architecture  encompass ,  but are not limited  to, traditional  programme  guides  like EPGs,  recommendation  systems,  search   functions  (text  and voice)  and related  ranking  systems,  user  interface  design,  location  of  apps /programmes  titles, content  descriptions , and hardware  short  cuts of internet -connected  devices   (Desjardins,  2016a,  2016b;  Johnson  et al., 2020) . Commercial  negotiations  and economic  interests  of  the organisations  developing  this architecture  and those  using  it come  into play and also shape  what   will be developed  and how.  Describing  and discussing  the different  technical  features  and the economic   and commercial  strategies  driving  them  is beyond  the scope  of this report . However,  at the end of this  section,  we provide  an overview  of three  concrete  examples  that emerged  during  the research ,  regarding  respectively  content  prioritisation  on smart -TV systems,  on smartphones , and on smart   speakers  (see section  2.5).  2.2. Users ’ Agency   Alongside  the influence  that prioritisation  has on nudging  users’  behaviours  and choices,  there  are also  factors  beyond  the control  of any organisation , institution  or policymakers . Users  make  the final  call,  and decide  whether  to watch  the recommended  content,  whether  to change  the apps ’ location  on their  smart -TV homepage,  whether  to delete  the pre-installed  apps , or add new  services  that they  like better.   These  users’  decisions  can be influenced  also by the desire  to watch  a specific  programme , sometimes   combined  with  a fan interest  in a particular  genre,  talent  or buzz  on social  media  (Johnson  et al., 2020) .  Professional  reviews  and ranking  on magazines , social  media  and dedicated  websites  are often   combined  with  recommendations  from  friends,  family  and colleagues , and they  are both  crucial  in  raising  awareness  about  programmes  and making  decisions  about  what  to watch  when  browsing  or  searching  (Johnson  et al., 2020:  6). Furth ermore,  a growing  number  of scholars  argue  that these  
      30   decisions  can also be shaped  by the prioritisation  mechanisms  that were  described  above . The extent ,  however,  to which  these  various  forms  of prioritisation  impact  users’  access  and consumption  of  content , is unclear . Gatekeep ers might  have  a more  comprehensive  understanding  of the impacts  of  choice  architecture  on users’  behaviours,  thanks  to the gathering  and processing  of behavioural  and  consumption  data . Researchers , however , have  practically  no access  to such  information  and empirical   and academic  research  in this area  is still very  limited.    Evidence  gathered  by independent  regulatory  authorities  like the UK Competition  Markets  & Authority   does  indicate  that content  curation  and prioritisation  techniques  like default  and prominence  position   on search  engines ’ results  display  do have  a significant  impact  on users’  behaviour  in search   (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  101–102) . For example,  when  a consumer  buys  a new  mobile   phone,  search  queries  typed  into the pre-installed  browser  or search  widget  will be served  by the  defa ult search  engine,  unless  the consumer  makes  an active  choice  to move  away  from  the default   (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  79). Evidence  shows  that these  default  settings  on mobiles   are likely  to exert  a more  powerful  influence  on users’  choices  and behaviours  than  desktop  defaults   because  users  are less likely  to take  active  steps  to change  or bypass  defaults  when  faced  with  a smaller  screen  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  102) . However,  patterns  and influences  become  even   more  complex  and hard  to predict  when  users  rely on an increasing  number  of devices . Furthermore,   active  personalised  settings  are becoming  more  popular  as they  allow  users  to pre-select  specific  apps,   service  providers,  or genres  they  would  prefer  to consume , thus  most digital  intermediary  services   actually  offer  a combination  of both  options . In conclusion,  users’  agency  and control  over  their  journey   to content  are always  dynamically  shifting  and it can be influenced  by a number  of factors.  Both  users’   tech  proficiency  as well as media  and digital  literacy  levels  are pivotal  to incre ase users’  awareness  and  knowledge  of content  prioritisation  strategies  and mechanisms.  The crucial  question  that we still have   to answer  though  is to what  extent  individuals  can maintain  their  freedom  of choice , within  a  constraining  technological  architecture  and the limitation s of their  tech  and literacy  skills .    2.3. Commercial  Negotiations   The ongoing  developments  in the ways  content  can be accessed  and discovered  also impact  the existing   market  structures  and power  dynamics,  giving  rise to new  aspects  of control  and dependence  between   different  industry  actors.  Indeed,  from  an industrial  and economic  perspective,  prominence  affects  how   broadcasters,  and more  broadly  content  creators,  can stay relevant  online  and find an audience  for  their  apps,  channels , and programmes  and advertisements  on different  digital  intermediary  service s.  Thus,  the current  moment  is one of considerable  complexity  as content  providers,  pay-tv operators,   internet  platform  organisations,  software  and hardware  manufacturers,  are competing  to control   access  to content,  viewers  and data  (Johnson  et al., 2020:  2). Commercial  negotiations  in this space  are  often  complex , yearly  deals involving  various  terms  and negotiating  points.  They  can involve  both   payments  for placements  or sponsorship  agreements,  but also trading -off of non-monetary  benefits,   such  as data  sharing  deals  of content  metadata,  in-app viewing  data  and general  data on the users’   journey  to content  (MTM  and Ofcom,  2019:  27–29).      
      31    When  talking  about  trade -offs between  key aspects  of prominence  and content  availability  […]  availability  of apps  and data  sharing  are big things.  When  you go to an app from  the homepage  of a  connected  TV, only the provider’s  app sees  who  you are, what  you're  watching,  what  you've  watched  in  the past , etc. And what  that means  for platforms  is that you can follow  a user’s journey  up until  the  point  they  went  into the app and then  you lose them.  […] And there's  quite  a big tension  there.  Because   obviously  the broadcasters  want  to be prominent,  but they  also want  to be important,  have  some  power   and really  understand  their  audience  in a way that lets them  provide  the best service  they  can. Wha t is  not a great  situation  for them,  or something  that they  are scared of, is something  like a Google  search,   where  users  are searching  for what  to watch  on TV, but there is no protection  anywhere  to say that a  certain  broadcaster  has to be more  prominent  in the Google  search  results,  it just comes  from  anywhere   at all. They want  to avoid  that as much  as they  can in the TV environment  by making  you associate  their   content  with  their  app,  by controlling  your  journey  once  you get inside  their  app, etc. So, there  are some   trade -offs for both,  and some  of it might  be purely  commercial .  (External  expert  2, 2020)    The participation  of different  industry  organisations  in those  deals  is however  not evenly  distributed   (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020;  McKelvey  and Hunt,  2019) . On the contr ary, bargaining  power  often   tips towards  internet  platforms  and international  hardware  and software  manufacturers  that are able  to strike  global  deals  at the expense  of local  and national  operators  (MTM  and Ofcom,  2019:  27;  Interview  data) . Organisations  like Google  Alphabet,  Apple  and Amazon,  which  are vertically  and  horizontally  integrated  along  the internet -distributed  value  chain , can indeed  exercise  a stronger   bargaining  power  in striking  deals  with  content  providers  on the inclusion  and prominence  of their   conte nt (MTM  and Ofcom,  2019:  27).   Further,  since  these  organi sations  operate  in multiple  markets,  they  tend  to strike  global  deals  with   both  hardware  and software  manufacturers,  to maximi se profit  and efficiency  for both  (Mediatique,   2020) . Indeed,  the defaul t settings  of different  devices  are not random  or neutral  choices   (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020:  394) . As argued  by some  research  participants,  interface  placement  on  smart  TVs or streaming  devices  is the result  of yearly  negotiation  processes,  and it is an important   revenue  stream  for manufacturers,  as it is often  an expensive  paid  placement  agreed  with  the service   provider  (PSM  representative  2 2019;  PSM  representative  6 2019).  Evidence  has also shown  that  default  positions  in search  are an important  feature  of the search  sector . Competition  over  access  to  these  default  positions  featured  on different  devices  is fierce , since  the defaults  have  a strong  influence   on the search  engines  that consumers  use and,  in turn,  act as main  gateway  to content  and information   (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  98–99). Thus,  if Amazon  Prime  Video  or Netflix  is pre-loaded   on a smart  TV screen ; if the remote  control  has buttons  that direct  users  to these  services  just with  a  ‘click’ ; or if Google ’s apps  are in default  prominent  positions  on smartphones  and table  devices  (Figure   11), it is because  these  organi sations  were  able  to pay significantly  more  than  their  competitors  for  such  prominent  position  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020;  PSM  representative  6 2019).31     31 For example,  Google  makes  very  large  payments  to Apple  in particular  in return  for being  the default  search  engine  on its  devices,  and it has had a default  agreement  with  Apple  for over  15 years.  It also has default  agreements  with  many  of the  largest  Android  mobile  phone  manufacturers  and mobile  phone  networks,  holding  default  positions  on smartphones,  tablet   and smart  speakers.  In combination,  these  agreements  mean  that Google  Search  is the primary  default  on the vast majority   of mobile  devices  in several  national  markets,  such  as the UK one,  making  its services  and apps  crucial  gateways  to content   and information  for the final  users.  For a more  detailed  see: Competition  & Markets  Authority  (2020)  Online  platforms  and  digital  advertising.  Market  study  final  report.  London.  Available  at: www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open -government -. 
      32   Compensation  for such  default  and prioritisation  deals  might  vary  and it could , for example,  take  the  form  of a fee or search  advertising  revenue  share,  when  for instance  a device  manufacturer  opts  to  pre-install  Google  Chrome  and Google  Search  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  100) . For  instance,  in 2019,  Google  paid  around  £1.2  billion  for default  positions  in the UK alone , which  is more   than  17%  of Google’s  total  annual  search  revenues  in the UK (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:   103) . All of these  payments  were  in return  for Google  being  set as the primary  default , and the  substantial  majority  of them  went  to Apple , while  a smaller  proportion  to Android  mobile  phone   manufacturers  or other  partners  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  103) . The business  models   and advertising  revenues  of digital  intermediary  services  partially  depend  on commercial  negotiations   around  content  prioritisation  at different  levels,  from  default  settings  to rankings  and recommendation   systems.  There  are therefore  strong  commercial  and economic  interests  at stake  as a greater  value  is  given  to the strategic  positioning  and prioritisation  of their  apps, rather  than  to those  organisations   who  actually  produce  the content  and information.  32  Figure  11. Search  default  positions  on mobile  and desktop  devices,  based  on device  usage,   UK market,  February  2020  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  101)33      32 Such  data  demonst rates  what  default  prominence  currently  costs  in the free market,  and it prompts  us to reflect  that  without  any kind  of intervention,  the current  functioning  of the market  could  create  serious  distortions,  as very  few  companies  would  be able  to spend  simil ar amount  of money  to be set a default  in a prominent  position.  Proposals  to  consider  in this area  would  be to look  at funding  models  for public  subsidy  for providers  that respect  public  interest   objectives  and criteria,  which  could  help  them  in being  set as default  on certain  digital  intermediary  services.  However,  more   information  on the costs  of default  prominence  positions  on different  devices  are often  matters  of commercial  sensitivity,   thus,  they  are confidential  data  that were  not accessible  for the researchers.   33 Source:  CMA  analysis  of Statcounter  Global  Stats  data.  The data  for mobile  devices  represents  shares  amongst  mobile   device  manufacturers  (including  tablet  devices),  calculated  on the basis  of ‘page  referrals’.  The data  for desktop  devices   represents  shares  amongst  desktop  operating  systems  (including  laptop  devices).  ‘Unknown’  consists  of all device   manufacturers  and operating  systems  that accounted  for a share  of less than  1% and for which  we were  unable  to identify   the default  search  engine . Google  or Bing  may hold  additional  default  positions  on these  devices  and browsers.  See  Appendix  H for further  details.   
      33   Similarly,  deals  over  apps  on smart -TVs are rather  opaque  and unbalanced ; there  is no transparency   over  the business -to-business  relationships . The prices  of prominent  slots  are estimated  to be  extremely  high  and very  competitive . As a result,  they  disadva ntag e smaller,  local  and national  content   providers  and broadcasters , as this has already  been  the case  with  EPG slots  sales  as the valuation  of  positions  became  a matter  of very  considerable  commercial  interest  (Figure  12). Further,  in the video on-demand  and streaming  world,  there  are monthly  auction s of shopping  airtime  and channel  positions   on user  interface s that have  led to high  prices  of EPG positions  by historic  standards ; this is because  the  buyers  outnumber  sellers  by three  to one (Klein  et al., 2012:  34). The experience  of EPG brokers  like  Canis  Media  has also shown  that good  channel  positions  have  significant  value  even  if they  are carrying   poor  quality  content  (Hall  and Lawson,  2012;  Klein  et al., 2012:  34). Hardware  and software   manufacturers  can also exert  influence  on certain  user  interface  design  decision s, especially  when  they   are able  to strike  multi -territory  prominence  deals , like in the case  of certain  smart -tv manufacturers   and international  streaming  services.      Figure  12. Indicative  valuation  of Sky EPG using  estimates  of top and bottom  slot values  in £m by genre  34      34 A report  commissioned  by Technologia  and I2 Media  Research  from  Canis  Media  provided  first-hand  experience  and data   of trading  in EPG slots,  specifically  of Sky EPG as Canis  Media  is the UK’s  largest  broker  of EPG slots  on the Sky platforms  that  specialises  in the valuation  and trading  of these  positions.  With  the data  provided  by Canis,  Technologia  and I2 Media   Research  have  made  a speculative  projection,  based  on the limited  data  available,  of the total  value  of the entire  Sky EPG.   Canis  estimated  the current  value  of the top and bottom  slots  in each  genre.  These  are somewhat  artificial  because  the top  slots  are either  occupied  by PSBs or by commercial  incumbents  who  would  be unlikely  to sell. Assuming  that the value  of  slots  declines  geometrically  from  top to bottom  of a genre  (i.e. by a fixed  ratio)  and using  Canis’  figures,  they  have  calculated   that the value  of the entire  Sky EPG is upwards  of £700  million.  Source:  Klein,  J., Freeman,  J., & Lambert,  R. (2012).  The value   and optimal  management  of channel  position  and prominence  on electronic  programme  guides,  Technologia  and I2 Media   research.    
      34   2.4. Zoom ing in: Content  Prioritisation  Case Studies   To exemplify  some  of the aforementioned  industry  practices  and the implications  that they  have  on the  prioritisation  of public  interest  content,  we present  three  salient  examples  that emerged  from  the  literature  review  and interviews’  data.    2.4.1.  Content  Priori tisation  on Smart -TV Systems:    the case of audiovisual  media  content   Type  of  gatekeeper  Example  Content  prioritisation  mechanisms   Devices   manufacturer  Smart  TV set provider:  LG Channel  Priority,  EPG prominence,  homepage  design,  apps   location,  search  functions  (voice/text),  additional  hardware   shortcuts  like dedicated  buttons  on remote  controls   Content   aggregators   Subscription  Video -onDemand  services:  Netflix  Promoted  titles  (generally  in a carousel  at the top of the  home  screen);  recommendation  rows  and titles;   personalised  user  interface;  catalogue’s  ranking  system  and  dedicated  subcategories  (to order  different  rows,  and within   the same  row),  popularity  rank ings (e.g.  “top  10” or “top   picks  for you”);  ‘up next’  features;  auto -play functions;   search  functions  (text/voice)     The impact  of the EPG positioning  in a linear  world  has been  demonstrated  by a number  of studies.   Indeed,  without  it being  the only  influence  on users’  choice,  evidence  has shown  that high  EPG positions   are acknowledged  by both  PSM  and commercial  broadcasters  to lead  to higher  potential  audiences  and  therefore  higher  viewing  reach  (Expert  Media  Partners,  2018a;  Klein  et al., 2012;  Ofcom,  2018) . Indeed ,  work  conduced  for Ofcom  largely  supported  the proposition  that EPG position  affects  users’  reach  and  audience  performance . The FEH Media  Insight  report  has shown  that there  is generally  a sharp  decline   in reach  occurring  between  the first and the fifth EPG slots,  followed  by a more  gradual  decline  from   slot 6 onwards  (Ofcom,  2018:  21). Another  example  from  the UK media  industry  has shown  that in  2017,  when  the channel  E4 moved  up from  the Virgin  Media’s  EPG slot 144 to slot 106,  its weekly  reach   increased  by 68%,  while  its share  of viewing  increased  by 44%  (OfCom,  2018:  21).35   Similar  observation s have  been  made  for the video -on-demand  space,  as recent  evidence  showed  that  the position  of content  and apps  on a smart -tv interface  is one of a range  of factors  that drives  users  to  click  on a particular  VoD service  or programme  (Ofcom,  2018:  3). Further,  once  the user  has accessed   a specific  VoD servic e through  the related  app,  content  prioritisation  takes  different  forms.  For instance,   as shown  by a recent  Australia -based  study  on SvoD  and discoverability  of local  content,  roughly  all  services  have  design  features  enabling  the strategic  promotion  of titles  on the homepage  and through   their  catalogues ’ rows  (Lobato  and Scarlata,  2020;  Scarlata  and Lobato,  2019) . The specifics , though ,  vary  significantly.  While  some  offer  country  of origin  searching  and dedicated  categories  for national     35 Source:  BARB.  Following  a public  auct ion for EPG slot 106 on the Virgin  Media  platform  in 2017,  Channel  E4 bought  a  higher  EPG position  (and  moved  from  144 to 106).  For the period  from  29 May  to 8 October  2017,  E4’s average  weekly   reach  (3 minutes  +) on Virgin  Media  was 1.475m,  for the period  9 October  2017  to 3 June  2018  its average  weekly  reach  was  2.485m.  In the same  period,  its share  increased  from  1.34%  to 1.94%  
      35   television  and cinema,  others  do not; for example,  Netflix  makes extensive  use of personalised   recommendations,  while  Amazon  Prime  Video  is less personalised  (Figure  13). Overall,  though,  it is  difficult  to generalise  because  not only  are there  differences  between  the user  interface  design  of the  leading  VoD service s, but UIs are often  personalised  and geo-localised,  thus,  they  also change   depending  on the location  and profiles  of the users.     Figure  13. Discoverability  features  for local  Australian  content  in major  SvoD  service  (Lobato  and  Scarlata,  2020:  5)36            Australian content  searchable  Yes Yes No No No Limited   Australian cinema drop down category  No Yes No No No No  Australian TV drop -down  category  No Yes No No No No  Australian cinema  recommendation row  Yes Sometimes  No No No No  Australian TV  recommendation row  Yes Sometimes  No No No No    Software  solutions  often  leverage  integrated  and interoperable  hardware  offers,  which  can have  lockin effects , meaning  creating  dependency  on individual  providers,  that advantage  those  vertically   integrated  providers  that offer  both  software  and hardware.  For example,  users  using  a smart  TV will  typically  be offered  the prospect  of accessing  content  via a series  of apps  on the home  screen  (Figure   14), whose  order  could  be decided  by the TV set manufacturer  and/or  the provider  of the TV set’s   operating  system.  Whether  these  two are different  players  depend  on whether  the manufacturer  has  its own  OS, or it has adopt ed one from  third  parties.  Smart  TVs and connected  TVs increasingly  present   customised  remote  controls  with  pre-installed  service  buttons,  most  commonly  Netflix,  Amazon  Prime   Video  and Roku’s  buttons  (Figure  15). These  bring  the user  directly  to the homepa ge of those  apps,   bypassing  all other  channels  and services.  In some  cases,  users  might  not have  a smart  TV nor a pay-tv  subscription  but have  attached  hardware  to their  screen.  Overall,  interoperable  offers  from  the  vertically  integrated  providers  like internet  platform  organisations  are able  to offer  a smoother  and  easier  user  experience,  while  concentrating  the influence  over  the users’  journey  in the hands  of fewer   actors.       36 Source:  Scarlata  A and Lobato  R (2019),  Australian  Content  in SVOD  Catalogs:  Availability  and Discoverability.  Submission   to the Australian  and Children’s  Screen  Content  Review.  Melbourne.  DOI:  10.4225/50/58225b7d49d1a;  and Lobato  R and  Scarlata  A (2020)  Response  to ACMA  / Screen  Australia  Options  Paper,  June  2020.  Melbourne.  Data  collection  between  2017   and 2019.    
      36   Figure  14. App prominence  in a Samsung  smart  tv’s user  interface.37         Figure  15. Shortcut  button  on smart  TV remote  controls.38                     37 Source:  Sams ung.   38 Source:  manufacturer  website.   
      37   2.4.2.  Content  Prioritisation  on Smartphones:  the case  of news  content   Type  of  gatekeeper  Example  Content  prioritisation  mechanisms   Device   manufacturer  Smartphone  provider:  LG  Operating  system   provider:  Google  Android  Google’s  pre-installed  apps,  integrated  Google  Assistant   system  for search   Content   aggregators  Search  engine  app:   Google  Chrome  app Prominence  of search  results,  ranking  systems  (within  the  same  page,  between  different  pages,  and within  the  thematic  sub-tabs  on videos,  images,  news  etc.);  dedicated   and sponsored  boxes   Social  media  app:   Facebook  Flagging  and tagging,  personalised  ranking  of newsfeed,   instant  articles,  recommendation  algorithms,  pushed   notifications,  personal  settings   Alongside  broadcasters  and newspaper s, people  are increasingly  finding  their  news  via content   aggregators  like search  engines  and social  media,  which  are increasingly  accessed  through  mobile   operators  and offered  by US-based  platform  companies  like Google  and Facebook  (Nielsen,  2017) . The  2019  Reuters  Institute  Digital  News  Report  has indeed  shown  that in several  countries  smartphones   and their  mobile  apps  are becoming  the main  gateway  to access  news,  overtaking  television  or print  in  terms  of reach  for “first  contact  with  news”  (Newman  et al., 2019: 15–16). The ongoing  fragmentation   and disaggregation  of the news  market  is also leading  to weaker  connections  between  people  and  specific  news  websites  or apps,  especially  among  people  aged  18-24 (so-called  Generation  Z) who  are  more  likely  to prefe r to access  news  via social  media  (Newman  et al., 2020) . Thus,  even  though  during   the Covid -19 pandemic  people  identified  television  as their  main  source  of news  (Newman  et al., 2020) ,  the general  trend  of the past few years  is that search  engine s and social  media  have  become  an integral   and essential  part of how  people  find and access  news  all over  the world.  However,  the prioritisation   principles  and content  curation  criteria  of these  systems  are in most  cases  unknown  to users  and hard   to negotiate  for the providers  and publishers  (Phillips  and Mazzoli,  forthcoming ). Yet, evidence  suggests   that search  engines  and users  generall y see relevance  of results  and related  ranking  as the most   important  aspect  of quality  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020) .   Taking  the market  leader  in search,  i.e. Google  Search  as an example,  we broadly  know  that its  algorithms  look  at many  factors,  including  users’  previous  search  history,  words  of the queries,   relevance  and timeliness  of pages,  location  and settings,  attributing  different  weight  to each factor   (Google  Search,  2019) . Moreover,  Google  Search  also states  that to ensure  high  standards  of “relevance   and quality,”  they  have  a rigorous  process  involving  trained  external  “search  quality  raters”  around  the  world  who  assess  a page’s  “quality”,  based  on the types  of content  and information,  authoritativeness   and trustworthiness  of the page,  its purposes,  its reputation  and/or  the reputation  of its creator , etc.  (Google,  2020;  Google  Search,  2019) . To some  extent,  this seems  like an attempt  to include  public   interest  principles  in the ranking  system  promoted  as part of its corporate  social  responsibility  strategy.   However,  there  are still a number  of questions  regarding  for instance  possible  criteria  that could  ensure   diversity  and pluralism  of news;  any underlying  commercial  and marking  agreements  that also influence   what  appears  more  or less prominent  on the rankings;  and how  human  curation  and automated  and  federated  search  are combined  in these  systems  (Phillips  and Mazzoli,  forthcoming ) (Figure  16).  
      38   Figure  16. Illustration  of a search  engine  results  page  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  74)39    On social  media  apps,  one of the most  influential  prioritisation  mechanisms  of these  services  is their   personalisation  systems,  whose  recommender  algorithms  can work  on the basis  of (i) data  on users’   preferences,  interests  and consumption  habits  (content -based  filtering ); (ii) insights  into what  other   users  like to read  (collaborative  filtering);  (iii) data  on their  users  (knowledge -based  filtering ), or (iv) a  combination  thereof  (Helberger,  2019;  Jannach  et al., 2010;  Karimi  et al., 2018 ). Depending  on the  outlet  and the metrics  used  for optimisation,  these  systems  can be used  to increase  time  spent,   advertising  revenues  and user  satisfaction,  but also to actively  guide  readers  and match  individual   readers  with  the news  they  will recei ve (Helberger,  2019:  994) . As further  argued  by Prof.  Helber ger,  the power  to actively  guide  and shape  individuals’  news  exposure  also brings  fundamental  questions   about  the values  and guiding  principles  of these  systems  as they  impact  the media’s  democratic  mission   (2019:  994) . Such  power  is even  more  concerning  when  popularity,  advertising  interests  and  commercial  agreements  become  primary  drivers  for content  prioritisation,  rather  than  integrity  and  diversity  of news  information . The implications  of such  prioritisation  for users  and for our news  media   ecosystem  are far-reaching  (Phillips  and Mazzoli,  forthcoming ). The ability  to serve  individual  users   better  and more  effectively  is also the source  of some  of the most  prominent  concerns  about  the  impact  of recommenders  on democracy  (Helberger,  2019:  995) . Not only academics  but also regulators   warn  that there  is at least  “a risk that recommendations  are used  in a manner  that narrows  citizens’   exposure  to different  points  of view,  by reinforcing  their  past  habits  or those  of their  friends”  (Ofcom,   2012) . This has been  a heated  debate  for years  now  (see also Pariser  2011,  Sunstein  2001,  Gitlin  1998),   and yet there  are still informational  asymme tries  and a lack of transparency  over  these  content  curation   processes  and prioritisation  mechanisms.     39 Source:  UK Competition  Markets  & Authority   
      39   Figure  17. Illustration  of Facebook  news  feed  40      2.4.3.  Other  forms  of Content  Prioritisation :   smart  speakers,  VR, game  consoles , and new  services   As the market  for media  interfaces  remains  hugely  innovative,  there  are a number  of other  access   points,  any number  of which  entails  potential  for gatekeeping  power  on content  prioritisation . One  current  example  is a smart  speaker,  which  is a type  of speaker  and voice  command  device  with  an  integrated  voice  assistan t system . Popular  examples  include  Alexa  from  Amazon,  Google  Assistant  from   Google  Alphabet,  Siri from  Apple , Cortana  from  Microsoft  and Bixby  from  Samsun g. What content  is  delivered  when  a user  for example  says:  “Alexa,  play the news” , or “Siri, play a documentary  about  the  election s”, is of course  a form  of content  prioritisation . As shown  by recent  studies,  only  a small  number   of consumers  chose  to access  content  in this way,  but the penetration  of voice -activated  speakers  is  growing  rapidly  and is now  reaching  mainstream  audiences  (Newman,  2018a,  2018b) . Currently  most   usage  is at a basic  level  and there  is still little  data  available  about  the usage  of these  devices  and their   impacts  on the way that content  circulate s online . Finally,  games  consoles,  VR services,  and other  new  services  could  rapidly  achieve  prominence  power .        40 Source:  Picture  by 200 Degrees  from  Pixabay.  Link:  https://pixabay.com/it/vectors /social -media -internet -facebook -web 3553807/    
      40   3. Potential  Problems  Related  to Online  Content  Prioritisation   The question  of whether  law and policy  should  create  regimes  of prominence,  or rather  step  back  from   the ongoing  process  of an ad-hoc private  construction  of a new  prominence  regime , raises  complex   issues  at the intersection  of freedom  of expression  and media  pluralism.  This section  aims  to address   this question  and prompt  reflection s on the problems  and policy  implications  of the ongoing  changes   of the internet -distributed  audiovisual  media  value  chain.  In particular,  based  on empirical  observations   and insights  gathered  from  the analysis  of relevant  documents  and the interviews  with stakeholders ,  here  we discuss  six key issues  that may  have  industry  and policy  implications  both  for the future   development  of our online  media  ecosystems,  as well as for the fundamental  values  upheld  by the  Council  of Europe.  The identified  problems  arise  from  the changes  in the media  landscape  and current  content  prioritisation  practices  described  in Section  2, which  might  require  a form  of regulatory   intervention . However,  issues  related  to forms  of propaganda  and censorship  (see 3.2 and 3.3) are  concerned  with  both  private  interest s capture  and state  capture,  address ing the risks  of both  in those   areas.      3.1. Threats  to Media  Pluralism  and Independence    The transformation s we have described are relevant for the key and intertwined dimensions of media  pluralism , intended as a plurality of sources, content and exposure. The first refer s to a plurality of  independent content and information sources, which focuses on the structure of the mark et and is  sometimes  referred to as ‘external pluralism’ . The second is defined as  plurality of diverse content,  which ca n also  be described as internal pluralism and is used to refer to instances where different vi ews,  genres and opinions are available  (Craufurd Smith and Tambini; Napoli 1999).  These two dimensions  have also been evoked in the Court’s case -law which regards media pluralism as an int egral part of  media freedom protected under Article 10 of the Convention, and States as its “ultimate guarantors”41.  For example, in terms of pluralism in the audiovisual sector, it is not enough to provide for the existence  of several channels or the theoretical possibility for potential operators to access the market. Rather,  effective access to the market must be allowed to a multitude of operators in order to guarantee  “diversity of overall programme content, reflecting as far as possible the variety of opinions  encountered in the society at which the programmes are aimed”.42  The third component has been more marginalised in policy debates, but it is of great impo rtance for  content curation and prioritisation  because it concerns the extent to which audiences are exposed to,  and therefore are able to find, discover and access a diverse range of cont ent (Helberger  et al., 2018;   Mazzoli,  2020b;  Möller  et al., 2018;  Napoli,  2011) . Indeed, also this third component is firmly  established in the Court’s case -law. Protecting not only the individuals’ reali sation of the right to  freedom of expression and information as such but also as a precondition for a functioning democracy,  the Court has clearly stated that citizens should be able to receive “a varie ty of messages, to choose  between them and reach their own opinions on the various views expressed, for what sets democratic  society apart is this plurality of ideas and information”.43    41 Informationsverein  Lentia  and Others  v. Austria , 24 November  1993,  Series  A no. 276.   42 Centro  Europa  7 S.r.l.  and Di Stefano  v. Italy  [GC],  no. 38433/09,  § 130,  ECHR  2012.   43 Çetin  and Others  v. Turkey , nos. 40153/98  and 40160/98,  § 64, 13 February  2003.  
      41   The transformations we have described could lead to the emergence of new co ncentrations of opinion forming power that contravene the spirit of established principles and  standards of media pluralism,  but not the specific legal instruments in broadcast licensing and media merger rules. The existence of  powerful gatekeepers of public opinion historically has led to conflicts of interest between private  owners of such gatewa ys, and a weakening of trust in democracy and social deliberation.  Not  addressing an uneven distribution of control and power over search and discovery of content might  lead to further distortions in the market and to the concentration of media circulation power in the  hand of a few powerful actors.  Furthermore, thanks to their scale and their diversification strategies,  these organi sations are able to leverage on their core technology services and revenue streams to  strengthen their gatekeeping role, while further expanding their services along the whole value chain .  In a distribution network that is mainly privately organi sed and run by media conglomerates,  commercial interests might supersede public interest objectives, leading to content prioriti sation  decisions that evaluate content based on a neo -classical  liberal notion of the market and economic  value, rather than taking into account also its public and societal value  (Mazzucato, 2018) .   Furthermore,  as argued  by scholars  of selective  exposure,  despite  today’s  abundance  of choice,  users   might  tend  to be exposed,  more  or less voluntarily,  to less diverse  content  (Möller  et al., 2018; Napoli,   2011) . Further,  without  the right  incentives  in place,  this tendency  could  be exacerbated  by user s’  interface  design,  search , and discovery  functions  that are primarily  driven  by an interest  to keep  their   customer  base,  rather  than  ensuring  audiences’  diverse  consumption  of content.  A much -commented   feature  of YouTube , for example , is the ‘next  up’ feature  which  features  a recom mendation  system   based  on previous  consumption . This feature  has been  criticised  for leading  users  down  ‘rabbit  holes’   of niche  content  such  as conspiracy  theories,  rather  than  providing  serendipitous  exposure  to a range   of views.  However,  we should  not simply  blame  the discovery  algorithm  and automated   recommendation  systems,  as their  nature  and purpose  is – and should  be – to organi se and rank   content.  Content  prioritisation  decisions , though , are a primary  source  of contestation  and negotiation   between  different  organisations  with  diverging  interests  and objectives,  as well as different  degree  of  power  and control  over  the decision -making  processes  (Mazzoli,  2020b:  309) . Some  research   participants  have  argue d that thanks  to the vertical  and horizontal  integration  along  the audiovisual   value  chain,  compan ies like Amazon  or Google  Alphabet  might  have  more  control  over  the way content   is accessed  and shown  to the final  user  and therefore  stronger  bargaining  power  vis-à-vis content   creators  that depend  on its devices  and intermediation  services  (PSM  representative  2 2019;  PSM   representative  6 2019) . Not addressing  this uneven  distribution  of control  and informational   asymmetries  over  content  discovery  might  contribute  to undue  market  and private  influence s over  the  independence  of media  and content  providers  that have  to rely on these  gatekeepers  (Mazzoli,  2020b:   311) . This is indeed  the trend  that we are currently  seeing , as access  to content  heavily  depends  on  those  gateways  that are owned  by fewer  internet  platform  organi sations  (Evens  and Donders,  2018;   Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020) .    
      42   3.2. Forms  of Soft Propaganda    Undue  power  or interference  on a users’  content  diet could  come  not just from  private  market  actors,   but also from  the state  and government  agencies . This is the case  especially  if a prominence  regime  is  implemented  in countries  with  authoritative  governments  and state -administered  broadcasters,  like  China  Central  Television  (CCTV)  and some  members  of the Council  of Europe  with  former  state   broadcaste rs. When  platforms  take  decisions  about  which  government  agencies ’ content  should  be  presented  unfiltered  and prominently,  there  is a danger  that such  communications  might  breach  the  ethics  of media  independence , and the division  between  media  and governme nt information.  It is  possible  to imagine  – and in some  cases  actually  see – public  service  announcements  that are made   directly  by ministers  seeking  re-election,  or situations  where  normal  protocols  and limits  on  government  communication  spending  are brea ched  when  new  communications  gatekeepers  are  offering  prominence  for free,  on the basis  of their  (subjective,  opaque  and potentially  automated)   assessment  of “public  interest”.  Such  control  of potentially  significant  segments  of national  media   environments  is wholly  incompatible  with  the principle  of media  independence  from  political   interference  and control.44  Controlling  media  outlets  and using  them  as a propaganda  tool is as old as the history  of media ; thus,   as boundaries  between  media  and digital  intermediary  services  increasingly  blur,  controlling  the latter   through  regulatory  intervention  could  also lead  to a soft form  of propaganda . Such  interventions  could   be used  to impose  prominence  to only appro ved forms  of discourses  and approved  channels  while   moderating  away  others.45 The potential  of authoritarian  countries  and also mature  democracies  to  blur the boundary , particularly  during  emergency  conditions,  raises  questions  about  whether  new  rules,   ethical guidelines  or transparency  requirements  might  be necessary.    3.3. Forms  of Soft Censorship  and Threats  to Freedom  of Expression   If some  forms  of content  are made  prominent,  it logically  follows  that others  are being  downgraded.   For example,  we have  seen  this during  the Covid -19 pandemic  new  theories  about  the virus’   transmission,  or immunities  are reported  as fact,  then  later  dismissed  as fake  and then  reinstated  as  trustworthy  (see for instance  Europol,  2020;  Italian  Ministry  of Health,  2020) . A situation  in which   prominent  channels  are monopolised  by one point  of view  would  arguably  impede  the plural,  evidence led debate  about  such  claims  and blur the boundaries  between  the views  of political  decisionmakers   and those  of scientists  that may  contradict  them.   To the extent  that prominence  decisions  are decisions  to act against  the economic  self-interest  of  gatekeeper  companies,  changes  in the prominence  regime  could  be used  to manipulate  media.   Removal  of EPG prominence  for public  service  content , for example , could  result  in an economic  failure ,  and new  obligations  to give prominence  to content  that is not popular  with  consumers  could  result  in  a decline  in users  for a given  social  media  platform.  All such  changes  should  be subject  to due public   scrutiny.  This is particularly  relevant  when  it comes  to the prioritisation  of news  and information  online.   As also highlighted  by the Journalism  Trust  Initiative  and its CEN Workshop  Agreement,  regulatory     44 More  on the issue  can be found  in the Court’s  case  of Manole  and Others  v. Moldova , no. 13936/02,  § 95, ECHR  2009,  and  the Council  of Europe  instruments  cited  therein.    45 By using  the term  “soft”,  we intend  to differentiate  this possible  form  of indirect  state  and/or  private  influence  on what   discourses  and information  should  be prioritised,  from  what  is traditionally  associated  with  state propaganda  i.e. material   prepared  by government  that is distributed  to a mass  audience  with  a manipulative  approach  aimed  to influence  and further   a political  agenda.  Thus,  we refer  to the tools  and strategies  used  to amplify  and prioritise  certain  content and/or  content   providers  over  other  with  the more  or less indirect  effect  of shaping  public  opinion  and users’  preferences.  
      43   intervention s on due prominence  that intervene  by rank ing individual  pieces  of content  or individual   content  providers  could  be easily  misused  and turned  into censorship  (Journalism  Trust  Initiative,   2019) . The selective  interventions  that promote  and prioritise  quality  and trustworthy  content,  making   it more  easily  searchable  and discoverable,  are as important  as the removal  and filtering  mechanisms .  They also require  a careful  balance  between  freedom  of speech,  “freedom  of reach”  (Baron  Cohen,   2019;  Mandese,  2019;  Wolfe  and Ries,  2019) , and equal  represe ntation  of voices  and opinions.  It is  indeed  a matter  of ensuring  that everyone  has the freedom  to express  her/his  opinion , while  ensuring   that they  can also access,  discover , and be reached  by a variety  of sources  and content  (Multi stakeholder  forum  on the Code  of Practice,  2018:  3–4).  3.4. Threats  to the Sustainability  of PSM  and Local Providers   As highlighted  also by the Council  of Europe,  independent  and sustainable  public  service and not-forprofit  community  media  can serve  as a counterbalance  to increased  media  concentration , since  by  virtue  of their  remit  and organisation,  PSMs  are particularly  suited  to address  the informational  needs   and interests  of all sections  of society , as is true of community  media  in respect  of their  constituent   users  (Council  of Europe,  2018:  2). However,  as the online  audiovisual  media  ecosystem  increasingly   moves  towards  a globalised  and digitally  convergent  market,  PSMs  and local  providers  are under   growing  pressure  to maintain  their  relevance  and reach  of large  audiences  (European  Broadcasting   Union,  2018;  Radu,  2018) . Further,  those  regulatory  benefits  like EPG prominence  rules  that protect   PSM  on linear  TV and ensure  access  and discoverability  of their  services,  are not applicable  online . As a  result,  PSM  are challenged  by vertically  and horizontally  integrated  players  that are able  to buy  prominence  on connected  TV devices  through  international  deals.    Further,  there  is a lack of level  playing  field  in the internet -distributed  audiovisual  industry , since  global   deals  between  manufacturers  and internet  platform  organi sations  are often  made  at the expense  of  local  and national  operators . These  operators  cannot  comp ete with  that scale  (e.g.  small  community   media  organisations)  and/or  are not allowed  to pay for prominence  due to their  public  service  remit   and legal  restrictions  (PSM  representative  2 2019;  PSM  representative  6 2019;  Community  media   representative  1 2020).  For instance  in the UK, until  now  the main  PSM  organi sations  have  still managed   to negotiate  their  presence  online  by launching  their  own  apps and streaming  services  and leveraging   on their  strong  brands  and existing  relationships  with  audiences  (Expert  Media  Partners,  2018b) .  However,  the negotiation  processes  are getting  more  difficult , as they  cannot compete  on equal  terms.   Thus,  as the number  of online  audiovisual  services  grows,  there  are warning  signs  that national  and  local  players  will be the first ones to “drop  out of the users’  screen” , as they  do not have  the scale,   resources  and capacity  to compete  (Public  service  media  representative  6, 2020).    “The  problem  is not now  too little  competition  to the PSM, but it is the PSM’s ability  to  compete  in a viable  market  […] You look at the success  of our content  in our national  markets,   and we are not scared  to compete  on equal  terms,  but it is not equal  terms  if a connected  TV  rises  in our national  market  and it has preinstalled  YouTube,  and Netflix  and Amazon,  and  suddenly  we are all gone.  […] There  are structural  issues  and asymmetrie s we cannot  do  anything  about  even  if we tried  to, as the option  will simply  not be available  to us. This is about   not only unfair  competition,  but more  about  structural  market  that we simply  cannot  do  anything  about,  even  by clubbing  together  and doing  our best.”          (Public  service  media  representative  6, 2020)  
      44   Unequal  bargaining  power  can have  negative  repercussions  also on the economic  sustainability  of  national  players , especially  those  relying  on advertising  revenues.  Distribution  and content   prioritisation  agreements  often  include  clauses  on the percentage  of advertising  revenues  that should   go to the different  actors , i.e. advertisers,  content  providers  and companies  owning  the digital   intermediary  services . Given  the sensitivities  of such  information,  details  on the shares  and revenues   split remain  unknown . Overall  though , the market  power  of organisations  like Google  Alphabet  and  Facebook  on digital  advertising  is now  protected  by strong  incumbency  advantages  – including  network   effects,  economies  of scale  and unmatchable  access  to user  data  –  that potential  rivals  and content   providers  can no longer  compete  with  on equal  terms  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  5).  Weak  competition  in digital  advertising  and unfair  revenue  split may  in turn  undermine  the ability  of  content  providers  to produce  and distribute  valuable  content,  to the detriment  of the broader  society.   Finally , another  problem  for PSM  and local  providers  enhanced  by the increasing  level  of disaggregation   of the supply  chain  (Figure  6) regards  the loss of control  of content  provider s over  the dissemination  of  their  content  and the related  risks  for the integrity  of their  offer.  In a world  where  routes  to content   multiply,  audiences  are increasingly  fragmented,  and broadcasters  often  do not have  direct  access  to  audiences , it is a challenge  for them  to come  up with  meaningful  technical  and legal  solutions  that apply   across  all these  various  ways  to access  content  and that could  allow  these  actors  to maintain  the control   over  their  content  and offer  (public  service  media  representative  7, 2020).  Thus,  it is not just about   being  first on a search  result,  but it concerns  both  the potential  loss of editorial  control  over  what  is  considered  public  interest  content  on their  services,  as well as the negative  impacts  on their integrity   of the content  offer  of a given  provider  (public  service  media  representative  7, 2020).   3.5. Threats  to Users’ Autonomy  and Perpetuation  of Inequalities    Communicative  resources  and competencies  are not equally  distributed  and prominence  regimes  may  result  in some  groups , for example  older  or younger  groups , being  less able  to make  informed  choices .  As previously  argued,  behavioural  nudges  and technological  architecture  can influence  users’  choices   and the types  of content  that surfaces  on their  searches,  feeds  and interfaces , in this way challenging   the often -claimed  users’  empowerment  through  digital technologies.  Distributional  effects  could  have   implications  for media  pluralism  and wider  democratic  processes  if the opinion  of such  groups  is more   easily  manipulated  and controlled.   Further,  as advanced , digital  technologies  are used  to curate  and prioritise  content  online,  they  may  generate  serious  threats  and risks  to our individual  and collective  interests  and values , and may  perpetuate  the commission  of substantial  and systematic  wrongdoing,  including  human  rights   violations  (Yeung,  2019:  44–45). An expanding  body  of research  is looking  into the ethnic,  gender,   social,  and racial  biases  that can be more  or less explicitly  embedded  into automated  systems  of  prioritisation  and recommendations,  which  in turn  may  reinforce  existing  structural  and systemic   inequalities  (see for instance  Powell  et al., 2010;  Yeung,  2017,  2019) . Access  to audience  data  is also  not equally  split between  different  providers  and there  is an overall  lack of transparency  over  who  can  and is monitoring  a users’  journey  to content,  and how  such  data  is in turn  use to feed  processes  of  algorithmic  curatio n and recommendation  systems.  The Council  of Europe  and its Expert  Committee   on human  rights  dimensions  of automated  data  processing  and different  forms  of artificial  intelligence   has also been  looking  into these  issues  (Council  of Europe , 2020) .   
      45   3.6. Lack  of Intermediaries’  Organisational  Transparency  and Accountability    It should  be clear  by now  that the reorganisation  of the architecture  of prominence  is fundamental  to  democracy,  media  pluralism  and freedom  of expression , as it is fundamental  for the future  evolution   of the media  ecosystem . Yet these  systems  and their  prioritisation  criteria  remain  closed  to public   scrutiny , and there  are strong  information  asymmetries  also between  digital  intermediar y services  and  media  organisations . In this sense,  the intermediaries  not only  act as gatekeeper s to content  but also  as knowledge  and data  gatekeepers.  Information  over  the criteria  used  to prioritise  and circulate   information  online,  as well as data  on how  users’  behaviour  is impacted  by such  decisions , is a source   of great  competitive  advantage . Thus,  the companies  running  these  digital  intermediar y services   choose  when  and how  to share  such  information  with  public  authorities , researchers,  or users , but also  with  content  providers  and media  organisations . This is a particularly  concerning  issue  when  those   gatekeepers ’ function  also as ad tech  intermediaries,  like in the case  of Google.  Content  providers  and  publishers  have  expressed  concerns  over  a lack of transparency  and competition  in ad tech   intermediation . This allows  intermediaries  to extract  a large  share  of advertisers’  expenditure,  reducing   the amount  that is ultimately  paid  to publishers  (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  63). If content   providers  and publishers  earn  lower  revenues  than  it would  be the case  in a fairer  and more  transparent   market,  this might  negative ly impact  their  ability  and incentive  to invest  in higher -quality  content  that  ultimately  benefits  users. (Competition  & Markets  Authority,  2020:  64) Further,  as curation  becomes   more  automated  and personalised  with  the use of ever  more  sophisticated  search  and  recommendation  systems,  it will become  even  harder  to shed  light  on these  matters.    At the moment  of writing,  a few organisations  have  started  to make  some  efforts  to explain  in a user friendly  manner  how  and why content  is displayed  in certain  ways  on their  interfaces  (Mazzoli,  2020b) .  Netflix  for instance  presents  on its “help  centre”  webpage  a brief  overview  of how  its recommendation   and ranking  system  works  (2020).  In addition  to a general  description  on how  the interface  is visua lly  organised  – i.e. with  rows,  titles  and ranking  – Netflix  vaguely  tells us that prominence  of content  is  determined  by a combination  of past  consumption  choices,  users’  profiling  and contextual  searching   (Netflix,  2020).  While  there  is a strong  assumpti on among  the users  that these  are the main  drivers  of  content  curation  online,  there  are also other  decisions  and criteria  used  by Netflix  to distribute  and  rank  its content.  Marketing,  sponsorship  and commercial  deals  also play a crucial  role in determini ng  what  content , and how,  is made  more  easily  discoverable  through , for instance , auto -play trailer   functions,  a specially  highlighted  and more  visually  attractive  section  of Netflix  Originals,  or a  geolocation -based  “Top  10” sections  of recommended  titles  (Hesmondhalgh  and Lotz,  2020:  398).   Thus,  more  transparency  on the criteria,  principles  and types  of arrangements  driving  these  decisions   is needed  to understand  whether  there  are primarily  commercial  interests  at stake,  or there  is still place   for public  interest  objectives  behind  these  processes.   “There  are different  regulations  for transparency  on social  media  and search  engines,   with  non-discriminatory  principles,  stuff  like you cannot  discriminate  one media  type,  or one  news  media  outlet  compared  to others,  or social  bots  should  be marked  in some  way.  But this  is very vague  at present,  thus,  the media  authority  or regulator  has to redefine  or write  some   explanations  and interpretation.”   (Policymaker  representative  3, 2020)  
      46   Finally,  in an increasingly  internet -connected  environment,  the net impact  of the changes  in  technology,  consumer  behaviour  and business  models  across  the online  audiovisual  media  industry  has  render ed it far more  complicated  to identify  which  players  influence  cont ent prioritisation  in which   gateway . In this context , the current  lack of transparency  and accountability  frameworks  leaves  space   for vague  corporate  social  responsibility  (CSR)  guidelines , which  ultimately  do not provide  sufficient   clarity  over  the respon sibilities  of different  gatekeepers.  Market -led self-regulatory  frameworks  that  are not legally  binding,  such  as the Facebook  Oversight  Board , can provide  enhanced  transparency  on  content  decision s but they  also aim to service  the company’s  own  legitimacy  purposes  (Mazzoli,  2020a) .  Further,  recently  proposed  industry  solutions  often  scrape  the surface  of the content  curation   strategies  that internet  gatekeeper s carry  out on a daily  basis.  Thus,  the crucial  question s of who   decides  what  should  be made  relevant  to whom,  and who  should  be held  accountable  for the potential   negative  impacts  of such  decisions  still remain  open .     4. Conclusions   This report  has provided  a framework  for analysis,  highlighted  emerging  problems  and raised  some   potential  policy  challenges.  While  growing  concerns  around  the ways  content  can be searched,   discovered  and accessed  online  have  attracted  the interest  of medi a researchers , the literature  on this  topic  is still limited.  At the same  time,  regulators  are struggling  to set out appropriate  definition s and  frameworks  that can address  issues  related  to content  prioritisation , prominence  and discoverability   online,  leading  to narrow  and piecemeal  policy  approaches.  We have  discussed  the policy  tensions  and  pressing  concerns  regarding  content  prioritisation  online,  with  particular  focus  on the internet distributed  segment  of the audiovisual  media  value  chain.  In light  of the issues  addressed  in the  previous  sections , it is necessary  for the Council  of Europe  and its member  states  to lead  a debate  on  this important  set of policy  issues.   The Council  of Europe  plays  a particularly  important  role in the protection  of democracy,  the rule of  law and human  rights  including  freedom  of expression . The question  of content  prioritisation  poses   concerns  for each  of these , and they  are particularly  pernicious  because  of the lack of transparency  and  public  understanding  around  these  processes . The public  need s clarity  about  the process  of public   information,  and the difference  between  public  and private  content  governance  systems  that influence   what  content  should  be considered  of ‘public  interest’ , and what  regulatory  regime  should  shape  such   decisions.  Further,  as this study  has argued,  there  is an interest  and a need  to reconsider  the existing   regulatory  frameworks  to cater  for the ongoing  changes  in the media  lands cape , and to address  the  potential  impacts  of current  content  curation  and prioritisation  practice s. We indeed  believe  that this  a matter  of great  importance  for policymakers , but regulatory  interventions  should  also address  crucial   questions  regarding  (i) the appropriate  degree  of prominence , (ii) the types  of devices  and digital   intermediar y services  that should  be covered;  (iii) the enforcement  and monitoring  mechanisms   required;  and (iv) the careful  balance  between  regulatory  interventions  and the infringement  of  freedom  of expression  and freedom  of choice.    Resolution  of the problem s will require  a continuing  open  dialogue  between  established  journalism,   platforms,  civil society  and democratic  representatives,  and a variety  of actions  by those  bodies  in  coordination.  Efforts  in this direction  have  been  made  by industry  associations  and cross -sectoral   initiatives,  but the Council  of Europe  and member  states  still have  an important  role to play in shaping  
      47   the debate  and advanc ing possible  solutions.  Until  now,  policymakers’  attention  has been  primarily   focused  either  on introducing  negat ive content  regulation  online  or extending  traditional  instruments   of positive  content  regulation  typical  of the linear  world,  such  as the EPG prominence  rules  discussed   in the report.  Indeed,  on the one hand , it is important  to revise  existing  regulation  to ensure  that PSM   services  still remain  relevant  and easily  accessible  online  and are able  to fulfil  their  public  service   mission  that is vital for our democratic  societies.  On the other  hand,  simply  shifting  traditional   regulatory  instruments  to a narrow  set of internet -connected  devices  does  not adequately  address   more  structural  problems  of our contemporary  media  industry  (Mazzoli,  2020b) . We therefore  call for  comple mentary  actions  and for a more  coordinated  approach  to these  problems  that are of  transnational  nature.  Such  actions  could  include  a combination  of minimum  legal,  operation al and  technical  standards  over  content  curation  processes  that are introduced  with  a co-regulatory  approach ;  regulatory  obligations  and voluntary  incentives  to promote  exposure  while  respecting  consumers’   freedom  of choice;  targeted  media  literacy  initiatives;  and sector -specific  ownership  and independence   rules  that can foster  fair industry  practices  and avoid  undue  market  and state  power  over  content   discovery.  If such  rules  are not successful  in creating  a pro-democratic  regime  of prominence  that is  genuinely  independent  and serves  the public  interest,  further  structural  solutions  will be required  to  shape  the market  and stronger  incentives  will need  to be introduced .  i. Transparency  requirements   More  transparency  on the criteria,  principles  and types  of arrangements  driving  content   prioritisation  decisions  is needed  to foster  public  trust,  and to understand  whether  there  are  primarily  commercial  interests  at stake  or there  is still place  for public  interest  objectives   behind  these  processes  (Mazzoli,  2020b) . This is not to argue  that transparency  is any sort of  panacea,  on the contrary  it often  shifts  the burden  of understanding  information  about   complex  systems  on individuals . Nevertheless,  having  minimum  standards  of organisations’   decisional  transparency  can be a first step  forward , as it has been  regarding  the process  of  content  moderation  (Ananny  and Crawford,  2018;  Gorwa  et al., 2020;  Mazzoli,  2020b) .  The rules  on content  curation  and prioritisation  must  thus  be made  more  transparent  and  publicly  accessible,  not only  to content  providers  that rely on digital  intermediary  services  but  also more  broadly  to users.  At the very  least  consumers  should  be able to access  reliable   information  about  the content  curation  and prioritisation  criteria  used  by internet  information   gatekeepers . Ideally,  this would  also prompt  such  organisations  to ensure  that expectations  of  consumers  are reflected  more  adequately  through  clear  opt-in or opt-out mechanisms . A user friendly  way to explain  the “prominence  score”  that these  compan ies offer  to their  partners   and content  providers  could  shed  clarity  on how  these  decisions  are made  and on which   principles  they  are based .  Failure  to achieve  real active  transparency  and literacy  will lead  to  further  mistrust.    ii. Standards    Industry -led initiatives  like the CEN Workshop  Agreement  of the Journalism  Trust  Initiative   (2019)  have  already  proposed  a co-regulatory  approach  involving  the development  of technical   standards  for journalistic  practices . The standards  take  into account  existing  Council  of Europe   standards  and reflect  the institution’s  approach  to media  pluralism  and freedom  of expression.   While  this initiative  is moving  in the right  direction,  the standards  are primarily  focused  on news   and information  and are meant  to be applied  by media  organisations  to foster  the creation,  
      48   circulation  and prioritisation  of public  interest  journalism  (Journalism  Trust  Initiative,  2019) .  Such  multi -stakeholder  initiatives  should  be extended  to include  more  institutions,  relating  to  a wider  range  of actors,  including  non-news  genres  in collaboration  with  civil society   organisations  and international  institutions  such  as the Council  of Europe . In time  such   institutions  may  ensure  that not only  media  organisations  respect  these  standards  but that  those  intermediary  services  that have  control  over content  curation  and prioritisation  also  comply.  Self-regulation  has indeed  shown  limited  effects  on the ways  in which  digital   intermediar y services  moderate  and curate  content.  Self-regulatory  industry  standards  should   be incentivised  and sustained  by a co-regulatory  framework .  iii. Audit  of Prioritisation  Processes.    This report  has established  that various  intermediaries,  platforms  and providers  now  award   prioritisation  on the basis  of both  commercial  and non-commercial  criteria.  It has also  established  that there  are potentially  far-reaching  implications  of these  processes  for freedom   of expression,  media  pluralism  and democracy.  Award  of distribution  and prioritisation   privileges  should  be subject  to independent  scrutiny  and audit,  in order  to prevent  the use of  prioritisation  for propaganda  and or censorship  purposes.  This could  take  the form  of an audit   of how  publicly  available  criteria  for recognising  providers  of public  interest  content , including   journalism  quality  marks , are used  by editorial  and automated  processes  of content   prioritisation.  Such  frameworks  of scrutiny  should  be subject  to tests  of legality,  necessity  and  proportionality . They  could  be carried  out by bodies  such  as: independent  regulatory  agencies   for the communicati ons sector;  international  self-regulatory  bodies  established  by civil society,   academic  institutions  with  expertise  in the monitoring  of freedom  of expression  and media   pluralism.   iv. Separations  principle   The Council  of Europe’s  commitment  to media  pluralism  also aims  to prevent  the danger  of  opaque  conflict s of interest s between  state  or private  interests  and points  of control  of public   opinion.  Further,  when  it comes  to issues  around  content  prioritisation , there  is also a potential   danger  of complicity  of state  or private  interests  with  powerful  actors  influencing  public   opinion.  Alongside  principles  of freedom  of expression,  media  plurality , and media  freedom,   the Council  of Europe  should  through  its instruments  reinforce  the principle  that whilst   powerful  online  gatekeepers  should  be accountable  to the public,  at the same  time  their   operation  should  be independent  of the government . Any relationships  should  be made   transparent,  and any state -mandated  obligations,  both  for negative  and positive  content   regulation,  should  be prescribed  by law. This reflects  the post -war consensus  that control  of  public  opinion  could  undermine  trust  in democracy  and the ability  of citizens  to freely  form   opinions.  In the past , the Council  of Europe  standards  on media  pluralism  and free flow  of  opinion  were  implemented  through  media  ownership  controls  and broadcast  licensing.   Authors , such  as Tim Wu, have  argued  that a broader  “separations  principle”  and a principle  of  transparency  should  be implemented  to ensure  that state  and private  interests  are not able  to  effect  control  over  content  and opinions  that circulate  in society  (Wu,  2018) . We have  argued   in this report  for a wider  conception  of pluralism  and freedom  of expression  that takes  into  account  emerging  gatekeepers  of opinion,  and one policy  principle  could  be that their  decisions   about  what  constitutes  ‘public  interest  content’  should  be separated  in particular  from  the  state.  
      49   v. Targeted  media  literacy    The resolution  of the questions  related  to the prioritisation  and public  interest  will ultimately   require  a combination  of user  agency  and public  intervention  to shape  the users ’ autonomy   and choice  architecture.  A solution  that empowers  consumers  to make  informed  choices  about   public  interest  content,  in a condition  of transparency  about  what  lies behind  the choices  that  are presented , should  be at the centre  of the new  regime.  But such  a framework  may  leave   certain  categories  of vulnerable  consumers  less well served  if they  lack the resources  to benefit   from  choices.  Thus,  there  is an important  role for monitoring  and assessment  of the extent  to  which  different  groups  of consumers  benefit  from  sufficient  public  interest  content,  which  can  in turn  inform  for targeted  media  literacy  initiatives.   Finally,  alongside  the development  of such  approaches  to prioritisation,  Council  of Europe  countries   also need  to find an accommodation  with  the market  power  of online  gatekeepers.  If procedural   regulation  and self-regulatory  approaches  are not sufficient , member  states  should  reflect  on the need   for more  structural  regulatory  intervention s in key areas,  such  as competition,  anti-trust,  adverti sing  and data . Moving  to more  structured  co-regulation  and primary  regulation  may  prove  to be more   effective  in certain  cases,  as observed  also by ERGA,  the European  Regulato rs Group  for Audiovisual   Services  in reference  to the Code  of Practice  on Disinformation  (ERGA,  2020b) . When  enforcing  a new   regime  of concentration  thresholds,  merger  rules  and potential  undertakings,  parliaments  should  seek   to introduce  incentives  to maintain  not only obligations  to provide  prominence  for public  interest   content  but also transparent  and procedurally  fair and open  processes  for agreeing  and reviewing  –  with  civil society  input  – the criteria  for process -based  rather  than  content -based  standards  of the  public  interest.        
      50   Annexes   Annex  1- Definitions    A consistent  set of definitions  and concepts  is used  to refer  to different  types  of industry  participants,   and technical  functionalities  of online  distribution  and content  prioritisation.  The following  definitions,   listed  in alphabetical  order,  are primarily  based  on academic  literature  and relevant  industry   publications  which  have  been  reviewed  and referenced  in the report .   App: an application  or program me, typically  a small,  speciali sed program me downloaded  onto  mobile   or other  connected  devices.   Connected  device : an internet -connected  device  which  offers  access  on third  party  streaming  apps  and  content  via the television  screen  through  a proprietary  UI. For instance,  a smart -TV is an internet connected  TV set, which  offers  access  to free-to-air linear  channels,  pay-tv services  and third -party   streaming  apps.   Content  curation : act of gathering,  selecting  and presenting  digital  media  content.  Content  curation  is  the other  side of the coin of content  moderation  and filtering,  as it can dictate  what  should  be  prioritised  on different  devices  and related  user  interfaces.    Content  prioritisation : a proces s that makes  part of content  curation  activities.  More  specifically ,  prioritisation  processes  refer  to the range  of design  and algorithmic  decisions  that positively   discriminate  and promote  content  by making  it more  discoverable  or prominent  on different  devices   and related  user  interfaces . Prominence  and discoverability  are therefore  outcomes  of prioritisation   processes .  Deep  linking:  the process  of using  a hyperlink  that links  to a specific,  generally  searchable  or indexed,   piece  of content,  linking  the users’  search  to a website  home  page,  or from  a user  interface  of a  connected -device  to in-app content.    Digital  intermediary  services : software - and hardware -based  services  that influence  the flow,  content   and accessibility  of content  information  online.    Discoverability : an outcome  of prioritisation  processes  which  concerns  the likelihood  of discovery  of  specific  content,  and therefore  the likelihood  of its consumption . It depends  on industry  dynamics,   negotiations  and organisational  strategies  and therefore  draws  attention  to the relations  between   institutions  and how  they  might  influence  the discovery  of certain  content  by audiences.    Electronic  Programme  Guide (EPG):  a menu -based  and ordered  list of linear  channels  displaying   scheduling  information  for current  and upcoming  broadcast  programming  (commonly  live TV  programmes).   Gatekeeping:  control  over  information  and content  which  takes  place  for example  by selection,   addition,  manipulation,  shaping,  deletion  and localisation  of thereof.  A gatekeeper  is therefore  an  organisation , intermediary  service , person  or government  with  the discretion  to control  this process.   Hardware  shortcuts:  buttons  on a remote  control  or connected  device  leading  the user  directly  to a  specific  user  interface  or third -party  app.   Home  page:  the first screen  visible  to the user  when  they  turn  on (or restart)  their  devices . 
      51   Internet  information  gatekeeper:  organisations  and their  digital  intermediary  services  that have  control   over  the flow,  content  and accessibility  of information  online.  Relevant  examples  for the purposes  of  this report  include  both  software  and hardware -based  services,  such  as video  and audio  content   aggregators,  technology  manufacturers  of internet -connected  devices,  search  engines,  social  media,   and app stores.  With  their  content  policies  and prioritisation  mechanisms,  these  services  can influence   to some  extent  consumers’  ability  to judge  what  is worthy  accessing  and watching.   Operating  system  (OS) : the back-end software  that acts as an intermediary  between  the hardware  (e.g.   screen , connected  device  etc.)  and the user . It controls  the device  and shapes  the user  interface  design.   The OS “sits between”  the device  and apps  and it allows  end users  to choose  between  different  apps   and between  different  content  or services  within  the same  app.  It is possible  for both  manufacturers   (e.g.  Samsung,  Sony,  LG etc.)  and developers  (e.g.  Android)  to control  OS behaviours . For instance,   Android  can develop  the entire  back  end of its OS and cede  control  to Sony  for its day-to-day  management.   Prominence:  an outcome  of content  prioritisation  processes  that concerns  the “physical”  i.e. virtual  or  visual  location  and prioritised  placement  of a channel/app/service  compared  to others  in time  and/or   space  on a given  interface.  Thus,  it concerns  the degree  to which  certain  kinds  of channels  and services   (and  therefore  content)  stand  out from  others  in electronic  programme  guides,  video  interfaces,   catalogues’  listing  etc. From  a regulatory  perspective,  prominence  rules  are part of traditional  content   regulation  instruments  that have  a positive  or promotional  approach,  rather  than  a negative  or  prohibitory  one.   Public  interest:  as an objective , it is intended  as an ideal  and normative  outcome  best  serving  a social   collective.  It is the complex  of supposed  informational,  cultural  and social  benefits  to the wider  society   which  go beyond  the immediate  and individual  interests  of those  who  produce  and receive  them.  To  codify  and operationalise  the ideal  outcom es, public  interest  objectives  should  be translated  into  implementable  criteria  and values  that should  be met to achieve  the ideal  outcomes.  Related   assessment  frameworks  therefore  look  at such  criteria  and values.   Public  interest  content:  a normative -driven  definition  of media  and information  content  that is  produced  by organisations  or providers  that strive  to achieve  public  interest  objectives.   Recommendation  systems:  it is an information  filtering  system  that seeks  to predict  the rating  and  prefere nces  of users  regarding  specific  items,  be it a piece  of content,  an app,  a service  or a channel.   Recommendation  system  can be the result  of editorially  curated  recommendation  where  the content   selection  is done  by content  editors  (e.g.  Sky’s  “Top  Picks”),  or automated  and personalised   recommendations  driven  by recommender  algorithms  (e.g.  Netflix’s  “Most  popular”  row,  or YouTube’s   “Recommended”  section  on the home  page).  We can identify  at least  four types  of news  recommender   algorithms,  namely  algorithms  that make  personalised  recommendations  on the basis  of metadata   (content -based),  insights  into what  other  users  like to read  (collaborative  filtering),  data  on their  users   (knowledge -based),  or a combination  thereof  (Helberger,  2019;  Karimi  et al., 2018) . In addition,  there   can be also self-selected  recommendations  where  users  determine  the selection  criteria  and feed  their   preferences  in the system,  or pre-selected  recommendations  where  news  providers  or distributors   determine  the selection  (Thurman  and Schifferes  2012) .  Search : The process  by which  users  find content  through  either  manual  text entry  or voice  command.  
      52   Set-up-box (STB):  An information  appliance  device  that generally  contains  a TV-tuner  input  and displays   output  to a television  set and an external  source  of the signal,  turning  the source  signal  into content  in  a form  that can then  be displayed  on the television  screen  or other  display  device.  They  are used  in  cable  television,  satellite  television,  and over -the-air television  systems  as well as other  uses.   User  interface : the front -end of a TV platform,  through  which  the user  can search  for and navigate   channels,  apps  and content.  This is the consumer -facing  segment  of the OS and it acts as the main   consumer  gateway  to content .   Voice  assistant:  a voice -activated  piece  of software  that can supply  information  and perform  certain   types  of tasks, such  as Amazon  Alexa  and Google  Assistant.   Web  feed  (incl.  news  feed ): a data  format  used  for providing  users  with  frequently  updated  content  on  their  home  page(s).      Annex  2 – Methodology    For this study  we have  used  a qualitative  methodological  framework . Data  and information  have  been   gathered  through  a combination  of semi -structured  expert  interviews  and document  analysis.  The  documents  reviewed  and analysed  for this report  included  a wide  range  of texts , from  relevant   academic  research , which  were  part of the broader  contextualisation  and literature  review  of the  research;  industry  publications , from  market  reports  to selected  publications , and legal  and policy  texts .  These  texts  provided  a contextual  understanding  of the industry  practices,  trends  and emerging  issues .  A full account  of the documents  reviewed  is included  in the bibliography .   The theoretical  and methodological  frameworks  and the work  carried  for this study  has been  informed   by the PhD project  of one of the authors,  Eleonora  Maria  Mazzoli,  who  is carrying  a UK-based  study  and  a comparative  analysis  at organisational  level  of the industry  practices  and policy  needs  in the area  of  content  curation  and discoverability.    Further,  semi -structured  experts’  interviews  were  conducted  to deepen  the knowledge  and  understanding  of the problems  and policy  needs  of different  organisations  involved  in the online   distribution  of audiovisual  content . In particular,  the researchers  carried  out 16 interviews  with  key  representatives  of the sector,  including  public  service  media,  community  media,  pay-tv operators,   internet  platforms,  policymakers,  and industry  trade  associations.  The sampling  has been  done  through   a combination  of purposive  and snowball  sampling,  which  was used  to identify  and select  interviewees   based  on their  profile,  expertise  and functions  within  each  organisation.  The interviews  focused   primarily  on content  policies  and distribution  strategies  of different  media  organisations,  and on  possible  challenge s and issues  that might  rise in today’s  online  media  environment . A thematic  analysis   was carried  out on interviews’  transcripts  to gather  relevant  insights  and information.  In respect  of the  research  participants’  privacy  and of the researchers’  ethical  guidelines,  quotes  and information   collected  through  interviews  are kept  anonymous,  and related  data  has been  treated  in the respect  of  current  data  protection  regulatory  frameworks.    
      53   Annex  3 – Summary  of Relevant  Council  of Europe ’s Instruments   The Council  of Europe  adopted  a number  of instruments  pertaining  directly  or indirectly  to media   content  regulation,  and relevant  for the discussion  on content  curation  and prioritisatio n. These   instruments  speak  to a broad  range  of issue s that are ultimat ely related  to the ongoing  evolution  of the  internet -distributed  media  system  and the future  sustainability  of a plurality  of independent  and  diverse  media.  Hereby  we have  provided  a brief  overview  of those  instruments  that are relevant  for  the discussion  of prioritisation  practices  and public  interest  content  online.    Promotion  of quality  news  content  and public  service  media    a) The Council  of Europe  broadly  recognises  the important  role of public  service  media  in upholding   the fundamental  human  right  to freedom  of expression  and information,  in accordance  with  Article   10 of the Convention , enabling  people  to seek  and receive  information,  and promoting  the values   of democracy,  diversity  and social  cohesion.  In particular,  in Recommendation  CM/ Rec(2007)3  of  the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on the remit  of public  service  media  in the  information  society,  it is highlighted  how  PSM  are expected  to fulfil  their  remits  and support  our  democratic  societies  by:  • providing  a forum  for democratic  debate  – thus fostering  democratic  participation,  and  constituting  a factor  in the social  cohesion  and integration ;  • being  sources  of impartial,  independent  and diverse  information,  high -quality  innovative   audio -visual  content  that complies  with  high  ethical  and quali ty standards,  which  should   also be adapted  and available  on digital  platforms  (calling  for an extension  and  diversification  of the PSM  remit) , and  • contributing  and investing  in the production  and distribution  of local,  national  and  European  content .  b) Draft  Recommendation46 of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  States  on promoting  a  favourable  environment  for quality  journalism  in the digital  age provides  guidance  to member   states  and media  stakeholders  on how  to fulfil  their  various  obligations  regarding  funding,   ethics/quality  and education  through  a combination  of legal,  administrative  and practical   measures  conducive  to a favourable  environment  for quality  journalism.  As regards   dissemination  of content,  the aim of the text is to prioritise  quality  content  on search  and social   media  platforms,  while  introducing  a form  of independent  oversight  over  the platforms’   distribution  practices.  The draft  recommendation  includes  guidelines  on:  • Cross-industry  collaboration  between  key stakehol ders  that represent  the whole  diversity   of society   • Transparency  of criteria  for the visibility,  findability  and accessibility  of news  and other   media  content   • Monitoring  and oversight  by independent  actors  through  for instance  regular  reporting  by  the relev ant online  platforms  about  how  decisions  relating  to content  curation  are made     46 To access  the full text of the Draft  Recommendation,  pending  adoption  by the Council  of Europe’s  Committee  of  Ministers : https://rm.coe.int/msi -joq-2018 -rev7 -e-draft -recommendation -on-quality -journalism -finalis/168098ab76  
      54   Ensuring  media  pluralism  and transparency  of media  ownership    Supporting  media  pluralism  is a key priority  of the Council  of Europe  and a major  part of defending   human  rights,  free expression,  and democracy.  Media  pluralism  directly  correlates  to freedom  of  thought,  ideas,  and expression,  all of which  are protected  by Article  10 of the ECHR.  The  Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)1  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on media  pluralism   and transparency  of media  ownership  deals  with  one of the key priorities  of the Council  of Europe,   supporting  media  pluralism  as a major  part of defending  human  rights,  free expression,  and democracy.   The Recommendation  acknowledges  that media  content  is today  not only  distributed  but also  increasingly  curated,  edited  and even  created  by various  internet  intermediaries.  Accordingly,  it calls   on States  to recognise  the variety  of roles  that online  platforms  have  in the media  content  production   and dissemination,  and the varying  degrees  of their  impact  on media  pluralism.  In particular,  the  Recommendation  sets out the following:    • Guidanc e on how  to enhance  content  diversity  and exposure  to the public,  and on the  types  of media  that should  be promoted  and supported  by states  in order  for a plurality  of  voices  to be heard   • Principles  of compliance  with  the requirements  of Article  10 of the Convention   • Support  for the development  of multi -stakeholder  initiatives  involving  social  media,  media   actors,  civil society,  academia  and other  relevant  stakeholders  which  are aimed  at  improving  effectiv e exposure  of users  to the broadest  possible  diversity  of media  content   online , in order  to improve  the transparency  of automated  processes,  assess  the impact   on users’  diversity  of exposure,  implement  privacy  by design  principle,  and provide  user friendly  information  on how  to find,  access  and derive  maximum  benefit  from  the wide   range  of available  content  (guideline  2.5)  • The requirement  to ensure  that the broadest  possible  diversity  of media  content,  including   general  interest  content,  is accessible  to all groups  in society,  particularly  those  which  may  have  specific  needs  or face disadvantage  or obstacles  when  accessing  media  content,  such   as minority  groups,  refugees,  children,  the elderly  and persons  with  cognitive  or physical   disabilities.  This implies  that such  media  content  should  be made  available  in different   languages  and in suitable  formats  and that it should  be easy  to find and use. (guideline  2.6)    Human  rights  and fundamental  freedoms  in online  media  systems    Recommendation  CM/Rec(2020)1  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  States  on the human   rights  impacts  of algorithmic  systems  provides  a set of guidelines  calling  on governments  to ensure  that  they  do not breach  human  rights  through  their  own  use, development  or procurement  of algorithmic   systems . In addition,  as regulators,  States  should  establish  effective  and predictable  legislative,   regulatory  and supervisory  frameworks  that prevent,  detect,  prohibit  and remedy  human  rights   violations,  whether  stemming  from  public  or private  actors.  The set of guidelines  formulates  the  responsibilities  of the private  sector  in this regard.  
      55     • Responsibilities  of states:   i. Levels  of transparency  with  regard  to the public  procurement,  use, design  and  basic  processing  criteria  and methods  of algorithmic  systems  impleme nted  by and  for states , or by private  sector  actors   ii. Data  protection,  privacy  and security  safeguards  by design   iii. Development  of standards,  frameworks,  indicators,  and methods,  through  public private  cooperation , for advanced  procedures  of human  rights  impact  assessment   • Advancement  of public  benefit  by supporting  independent  research  aimed  at assessing,   testing  and advancing  the potential  of algorithmic  systems  for creating  positive  human   rights  effects  and advancing  public  benefit.  Responsibilities  of private  actors:   i. Consent  rules  and privacy  settings   ii. Continuous  evaluation  also through  the implementation  of human  rights  impact   assessment s  iii. Access  to data   iv. Users -friendly  terms  of services  and transparency  on  nature  and functionality  of  the algorithmic  system s  v. Human  rights  impact  assessments,  which  should  be conducted  as openly  as  possible  and with  the active  engagement  of affected  individuals  and groups   b) The Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)2  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  states  on the  roles  and responsibilities  of internet  intermediaries  argues  that intermediary  services  may carry   out several  functions  in parallel,  including  moderating  and ranking  content,  mainly  through   algorithmic  processing.  They  may  thereby  exert  forms  of control  which  influence  users’  access   to information  online  in ways  comparable  to media,  and they  may  also perform  other  functions   that resemble  those  of publishers.  It is primarily  the obligation  of states  to make  sure  that laws,   regulations  and policies  applicable  to internet  intermediaries  safeguard  the human  rights  and  fundamental  freedoms  of users  effectively.  However,  internet  intermediaries  have  the  responsibility  to respect  the internationally  recognised  human  rights  of their  users  and third   parties  affected  by their  activities.  States  and intermediaries  therefore  have  to work  together.   This recommendation  also addresse s both  states  and the private  sector,  by introducing:   • Shar ed responsibility  of states  and internet  intermediar ies to respect  the  internationally  recognised  human  rights  of their  users  and third  parties  affected  by  their  activities   • Principles  of compliance  with  the requirements  of Article  10 of the Convention  with   regard  to the different  functions  and activities  performed  by the intermediaries,   including  their  content  moderation  practices   • Transparency  requirements  on terms  of service  agreements,  community  standards   and data  processing  techniques     
      56   References   ACMA  (2020)  Supporting  Australian  stories  on our screens . Canberra:  Australian  Communications  and  Media  Authority.  Available  at: https://www.communications.gov.au/have -your -say/supporting australian -stories -our-screens -options -paper.   Ananny  M and Crawford  K (2018)  Seeing  without  knowing:  Limitations  of the transparency  ideal  and  its application  to algorithmic  accountability.  New  Media  and Society  20(3):  973–989.  DOI:   10.1177/1461444816676645.   Baron  Cohen  S (2019)  Read  Sacha  Baron  Cohen’s  scathing  attack  on Facebook  in full: ‘grea test  propaganda  machine  in history’  . The Guardian , 22 November.  London.  Available  at:  https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2019/nov/22/sacha -baron -cohen -facebook propaganda  (accessed  4 September  2020).   Benington  J (2011)  From  Private  Choice  to Public  Value? In: Benington  J and Moore  MH (eds)  Public   Value:  Theory  and Practice . Palgrave  Macmillan,  pp. 31–49.  Benington  J and Moore  MH (eds)  (2011)  Public  Value:  Theory  and Practice . Palgrave  Macmillan.   Bergg  D (2004)  Taking  a horse  to water?  Delivering  public  service  broadcasting  in a digital  universe.  In:  Tambini  D and Cowling  J (eds)  From  Public  Service  Broadcasting  to Public  Service   Communications . London:  Institute  for public  policy  research,  pp. 16–33.  Bright  J, Au H, Bailey  H, et al. (2020)  Coronavirus  Coverage  by State -Backed  English -Language  News   Sources  Understanding  Chinese,  Iranian,  Russian  and Turkish  Government  Media . August.   Oxford.  Available  at: https://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/wp content/uploads/sites/93/2020/04/Coronavirus -Coverage -by-State -Backed -English -Language News -Sources.pdf  (accessed  11 November  2020).   Bucher  T (2012)  Want  to be on the top?  Algorithmic  power  and the threat  of invisibility  on Facebook.   New  Media  and Society  14(7):  1164 –1180.  DOI:  10.1177/1461444812440159.   Bucher  T (2018)  If...Then:  Algorithmic  Power  and Politics . Oxford,  UK: Oxford  University  Press.   Cabrera  Blázquez  FJ, Cappello  M, Grece  C, et al. (2016)  VOD,  platforms  and OTT:  which  promiton   obligations  for European  works?  IRIS Plus,  European  Audiovisual  Observatory . Strasbour g,.  Cairncross  DF (2019)  The Cairncross  Review.  A sustainable  future  for journalism . London.  Available  at:  www.gov.uk/government/publications.   Clark  T (2020)  Movies  and TV shows  about  pandemics  and disasters  are surging  in popularity  on  Netflix.  Available  at: https://www.businessinsider.com/pandemic -and-2012 -among -netflixs most -popular -titles -2020 -3?IR=T  (accessed  30 July 2020).   Competition  & Markets  Authority  (2020)  Online  platforms  and digital  advertising.  Market  study  final   report.  London.  Available  at: www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open -government -.  COMPROP  (2020)  Coronavirus  Misinformation:  Weekly  Briefings.  Available  at:  https://comprop.oii.ox.ac.uk/research/posts/coronavirus -misinformation -weekly -briefings/   (accessed  11 November  2020).   Council of Europe  (2018)  Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)1  of the Committee  of Ministers  to  member  States  on media  pluralism  and transparency  of media  ownership.  Available  at:  https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?documentId=09 00001 680790e13.  
      57   Council  of Europe  (2020)  Recommendation  of the Committee  of Ministers  to member  States  on the  human  rights  impacts  of algorithmic  systems.  Available  at:  https://search.coe.int/cm/pages/result_details.aspx?objectid=09000016809e1154#globalcontai ner (accessed  12 November  2020).   Cowling  J and Tambini  D (eds)  (2002)  From  Public  Broadcasting  to Public  Service  Communications .  London:  Institute  for Public  Policy  Research.  Available  at:  https://www.ippr.org/files/images/media/files/publication/2011/05/public_service_broadcastin g_1296.pdf.   Coyle  D (2018)  Platform  Dominance:  the shortcomings  of antitrust  policy.  In: Tambini  D and Moore  M  (eds)  Digital  Dominance.  The Power  of Google,  Amazon,  Facebook  and Apple . Oxford,  UK: Oxford   University  Press,  pp. 50–70.  Coyle  D and Woolard  C (2010)  Public  Value  in Practice.  Restoring  the ethos  of public  service . London.   Available  at:  https://downloads.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/regulatory_framew ork/pvt/public_value_ practice.pdf  (accessed  3 July 2020).   Craufurd  Smith  R and Tambini  D (2012)  Measuring  Media  Plurality  in the United  Kingdom:  Policy   Choices  and Regulatory  Challenges.  Journal  of Media  Law 4(1):  35–63. DOI:   10.5235/175776312802483862.   Desjardins  D (2016a)  Discoverability.  Toward  a common  frame  of reference.  Part 1. Available  at:  http://www.cmf -fmc.ca.   Desjardins  D (2016b)  Discoverability.  Toward  a common  frame  of reference.  Part 2: The Audience   Journey . Available  at: https://trends.cmf -fmc.ca/research -reports/discoverability -toward -acommon -frame -of-reference/.   El-Husseini  F (2010)  An Analysis  of the Audience  Impact  of Page  One EPG Prominence.  A Report  for  Ofcom . London.  Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0033/68 793/attentionalreport.pdf.   El-Husseini  F (2013)  An Analysis  of the Audience  Impact  of Page  One EPG Prominence  A Report  for  Ofcom . London.  Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0015/57201/impact_of_epg_prominence.pdf   EPRA  (2020)  Medi a plurality  in the age of algorithms  - European  Media  & Regulation  . Acast.  Available   at: https://shows.acast.com/epra/episodes/media -plurality -in-the-age-of-algorithms  (accessed  3  September  2020).   Epstein  R (2018)  Manipulating  Minds:  The Power  of Search  Engines  to Influence  Votes  and Opinions.   In: Tambini  D and Moore  M (eds)  Digital  Dominance:  The Power  of Google,  Amazon,  Facebook,   and Apple . New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  pp. 294–319.   ERGA  (2020a)  ERGA  Position  Paper  on the Digital  Services  Act . June . Brussels.  Available  at:  https://erga -online.eu/wp -content/uploads/2020/06/ERGA_SG1_DSA_Position Paper_adopted.pdf  (accessed  3 September  2020).   ERGA  (2020b)  ERGA  Report  on disinformation:  Assessment  of the implementation  of the Code  of  Practice  . May.  Available  at: https://erga -online.eu/wp -content/uploads/2020/05/ERGA -2019 report -published -2020 -LQ.pdf  (accessed  29 October  2020).   Espinoza  J (2020)  Brussels  to launch  far-reaching  overhaul  of online  content  rules  | Financial  Times.   Available  at: https://www. ft.com  (accessed  8 June  2020).   European  Audiovisual  Observatory  (2019)  The internationalisation  of TV audience  markets  in Europe.:   59. Available  at: http://www.obs.coe.int.  
      58   European  Broadcasting  Union  (2017)  Legal  Focus:  PSM  Remit  Principles  for the digita l media  age.  Available  at: https://www.ebu.ch/publications/psm -remit -principles -for-the-digital -media -age.  European  Broadcasting  Union  (2018)  Market  Insights.  PSM  competitive  environment . Media   intelligence  Service . Available  at:  https://www.ebu.ch/publica tions?publicationType=research&topic=market -trends.   European  Commission  (2020)  The Digital  Services  Act package.  Available  at:  https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/digital -services -act-package  (accessed  16 July  2020).   European  Union  (2010)  Directive  2010/13/EU  on the coordination  of certain  provisions  laid down  by  law, regulation  or administrative  action  in Member  States  concerning  the provision  of  audiovisual  media  services  (Audiovisual  Media  Services  Directive).  Offic ial Journal  of the  European  Union  95(1):  24. Available  at: http://eur lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:095:0001:0024:en:PDF.   European  Union  (2018a)  Directive  (EU)  2018/  1808  amending  Directive  2010/  13/ EU on the  coordination  of certain  provisions  laid down  by law, regulation  or administrative  action  in  Member  States  concerning  the provision  of autio  visual  media  services  in view  of changing   market  r. Official  Journal  of the European  Union  L 303/69(March  2010):  24. Available  at:  https:// eur-lex.europa.eu/legal content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018L1808&qid=1550491395985&from=en.   European  Union  (2018b)  Directive  (EU)  2018/1972  of the European  Parliament  and of the Council  of  11 December  2018  establishing  the European  Electronic  Communication s Code.  Eur-Lex.  2018/1972.  European  Union.  Available  at: https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal content/EN/TXT/?qid=1547633333762&uri=CELEX:32018L1972  (accessed  13 May  2020).   European  Union  (2018c)  EU Code  of Practice  on Disinformation.  European  Commission.  Available  at:  https://ec.europa.eu/digital -single -market/en/news/code -practice -disinformation.   Europol  (2020)  COVID -19: Fake  News.  Disinformation  and misinformation  around  COVID -19 – a  sneaky  threat.  Available  at: https://www.europol.europa.eu/covid -19/covid -19-fake -news   (accessed  4 September  2020).   Evens  T and Donders  K (2018)  Platform  Power  and Policy  in Transforming  Television  Markets . Palgrave   Global  Media  Policy  and Business.  DOI:  http://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-319-74246 -5_8.   Expert  Media  Partners  (2018a)  Report  on the UK Market  in EPG Positions . Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/116287/expert -media -partners.pdf.   Expert  Media  Partners  (2018b)  Report  on the UK Market  in EPG Positions . London.  Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/116287/expert -media -partners.pdf.   Feintuck  M and Varney  M (2006)  Media  Regulation,  Public  Interest  and the Law,  Second  Edition .  Media  Regulation,  Public Interest  and the Law,  Second  Edition . Edinburgh  University  Press.   Fletcher  P (2020)  Safeguarding  Australian  content  in a world  of changing  viewership.  Available  at:  https://www.smh.com.au/national/safeguarding -australian -content -in-a-world -of-changing viewership -20200929 -p56077.html  (accessed  13 October  2020).   Flew  T (2018)  Content  Regulation.  Networks  and States . DOI:  10.7551/mitpress/8299.003.0012.   Fontaine  G (2015)  The Visibility  Of Film On On-Demand  Platforms:  Germany,  France  & The United   Kingdom.  European  Audiovisual  Observatory  (November):  1–34.  Gillespie  T (2010)  The politics  of ‘platforms’.  new media  & society  12(3):  347–364.  DOI:   10.1177/1461444809342738.  
      59   Gillespie  T (2018)  Custodians  of the Internet:  Platforms,  Content  Moderation,  and the Hidd en  Decisions  That  Shape  Social  Media . Yale University  Press/New  Haven  & London.   Google  (2020)  General  Guidelines  - Search  Quality  Rating  Programme . Available  at:  https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/guidelines.raterhub.com/en//searchqualityevaluat orguidelines.pdf.   Google  Search  (2019)  How  Search  algorithms  work.  Available  at:  https://www.google.com/intl/en_uk/search/howsearchworks/algorithms/  (accessed  21  February  2020).   Gorwa  R, Binns  R and Katzenbach  C (2020)  Algorithmic  content  moderation:  Technica l and political   challenges  in the automation  of platform  governance.  Big Data  and Society  7(1):  1–15. DOI:   10.1177/2053951719897945.   Hall E and Lawson  F (2012)  The UK’s  EPG Market . London.  Available  at:  https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/2013050319 2524/http:/dcmscommsreview.readan dcomment.com/wp content/uploads/2012/07/The_value_and_optimal_management_of_channel_position_and_pr ominence_on_electronic_programme_guides.pdf  (accessed  25 June  2020).   Helberger  N (2019)  On the Democratic  Role  of News  Recom menders.  Digital  Journalism  7(8).   Routledge:  993–1012.  DOI:  10.1080/21670811.2019.1623700.   Helberger  N, Karppinen  K and D’Acunto  L (2018)  Exposure  diversity  as a design  principle  for  recommender  systems.  Information  Communication  and Society  21(2).  Taylor  & Francis:  191– 207.  DOI:  10.1080/1369118X.2016.1271900.   Hesmondhalgh  D and Lotz AD (2020)  Video  Screen  Interfaces  as New  Sites  of Media  Circulation   Power.  International  Journal  of Communication  14(0):  24.  Information  Commissioner’s  Office  (2012)  Public  Interest  Test.  Freedom  of Information  Act. London.   DOI:  10.4135/9781446215821.n178.   ISED  Canada  (2020)  Canada’s  Communication  Future:  Time  to Act. Final  Report . Available  at:  www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/110.nsf/eng/00012.html  (accessed  9 April  2020).   Italian  Ministry  of Health  (2020)  Covid -19, le nuove  fake  news  smentite  dal ministero.  Available  at:  http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/news/p3_2_1_1_1.jsp?lingua=italiano&menu=notizie&p=dalm inistero&id=4569  (accessed  4 September  2020).   Jannach  D, Zanker  M, Felfernig  A, et al. (2010)  Recommender  Systems:  An Introduction  . 1st ed. New   York:  Cambridge  University  Press.   Johnson  C, Dempsey  L and Hills M (2020)  Routes  to Content:  How  people  decide  what  TV to watch  Key  Insights  1. Default  TV. Available  at: https://mhm.hud.ac. uk/routes/routes -report.pdf  (accessed   18 April  2020).   Journalism  Trust  Initiative  (2019)  CWA  17493.  CEN Workshop  Agreement.  CWA  17493:2019  E.  Brussels,  Belgium:  CEN-CENELEC  Management  Centre.  Available  at:  https://www.cen.eu/News/Workshops/Pages/WS -2019 -018.aspx.   Karimi  M, Jannach  D and Jugovac  M (2018)  News  Recommender  Systems -Survey  and Roads  Ahead.   Information  Processing  & Management : 1–49. DOI:  10.1016/j.ipm.2018.04.008.   Klein  J, Freeman  J and Lambert  R (2012)  The value  and optimal  management  of channel  position  and  prominence  on electronic  programme  guides . London.  Available  at:  https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk  (accessed  15 June  2020).    
      60   Knoll  EM (2012)  The Public  Value  Notion  in UK Public  Service  Broadcasting . London  School  of  Economics  and Political  Science.   Laidlaw  EB (2010)  A framework  for identifying  Internet  information  gatekeepers.  International  Review   of Law,  Computers  and Technology  24(3):  263–276.  DOI:  10.1080/13600869.2010.522334.   Laidlaw  EB (2012)  Internet  Gatekeepers,  Human  Rights  and Corporate  Social  Responsibilities.   (January):  1–304.   Lobato  R and Scarlata  A (2020)  Response  to ACMA  / Screen  Australia  Options  Paper,  June  2020 .  Melbourne.   Lowe  GF and Martin  F (eds)  (2013)  The Value  of Public  Service  Media.  RIPE@2013 . Gothenbu rg:  Nordicom.  Available  at: www.nordicom.gu.seRIPE2013  (accessed  2 July 2020).   Mandese  J (2019)  Freedom  Of Speech  Is Not Freedom  Of Reach.  Available  at:  https://www.mediapost.com/publications/article/343722/freedom -of-speech -is-not-freedom of-reach.html  (accessed  12 June  2020).   Mazzoli  EM (2020a)  Facebook:  Balancing  freedom  of expression  and users’  protection.  Privacy  Laws  &  Business  Internatio(163):  18–20. Available  at: https://www.privacylaws.com/reports gateway/reports/.   Mazzoli  EM (2020b)  Online  content  governance:  Towards  a framework  for analysis  for prominence   and discoverability.  Journal  of Digital  Media  & Policy  11(1).   Mazzucato  M (2018)  The Value  of Everything:  Making  and Taking  in the Global  Economy . London:   Allen  Lane.   Mazzucato  M and O’Donovan  C (2016)  The BBC as market  shaper  and creator.  In: Seth -Smith  N,  Mackay  J, and Hind  D (eds)  Rethinking  the BBC:  Public  Media  in the 21st  Century . Morgate:   Commonwealth  Publishing,  pp. 101–105.   McDonald  A (2018)  Sky urges  Ofcom  to look  ‘beyond  the rhetoric’  of PSBs  in prominence  decision.   Available  at: https://www.digitaltveurope.com/2018/11/16/sky -urges -ofcom -to-look -beyond the-rhetoric -of-psbs -in-prominence -decision/  (accessed  16 April  2020).   McKelvey  F (2016)  The new  attention  factory:  discoverability  and Canadian  cultural  policy.  The  Monitor.  Media,  Interner,  Algorithm  July.  Available  at:  https://www.policyalternatives.ca/publications/monitor/new -attention -factory.   McKelvey  F and Hunt  R (2019)  Discoverability:  Toward  a Definition  of Content  Discovery  Through   Platforms.  Social  Media  + Society  5(1):  205630511881918.  DOI:  10.1177/2056305118819188.   McQuail  D (1992)  Media  Performance.  Mass  Communication  and the Public  Interest . SAGE   Publications.  Available  at: https://uk.sagepub.com/en -gb/eur/media -performance/book202974.   Mediatique  (2020)  Connected  TV gateways :  review  of market  dynamics.  A report  for Ofcom . London.   Available  at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/201493/connected gateways.pdf.   Medienstaatsvertrag  (2019) Staatsvertrag  zur Modernisierung  der Medienordnung  in Deutschland.   Beschlussfassung  der Konferenz  der Regierungschefinnen  und Regierungschefs  der Länder  .  Available  at: https://www.rlp.de/fileadmin/rlp -stk/pdf Dateien/Medienpolitik/ModStV_MStV_und_JMSt V_2019 -12-05_MPK.pdf  (accessed  12 May   2020).   Michael  J (1990)  Regulating  Communications  Media:  From  the Discretion  of Sound  Chaps  to the  Arguments  of Lawyers.  In: Ferguson  M (ed.)  Public  Communication:  The New  Imperatives .  London:  SAGE  Publications,  pp. 40–60. 
      61   Mohsin  M (2020)  10 Google  Search  Statistics  You Need  to Know  in 2020.  Available  at:  https://www.oberlo.com/blog/google -search -statistics  (accessed  23 June  2020).   Möller  J, Trilling  D, Helberger  N, et al. (2018)  Do not blame  it on the algorithm:  an emp irical   assessment  of multiple  recommender  systems  and their  impact  on content  diversity.   Information  Communication  and Society  21(7).  Taylor  & Francis:  959–977.  DOI:   10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076.   Moore  M and Tambini  D (eds)  (2018)  Digital  Dominance:  The Power  of Google,  Amazon,  Facebook,   and Apple . New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.   MTM  and Ofcom  (2019)  Review  of TV user  interfaces  in the UK market.  Current  offerings  and future   developments.  Final  Report . London.  Available  at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/cons ultations -andstatements/category -1/epg -code -prominence -regime.   Napoli  PM (2011)  Exposure  Diversity  Reconsidered.  Journal  of Information  Policy  1(2):  246–259.   Available  at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5325/jinfopoli.1.2011.0246.   Napoli  PM (2014)  Automa ted media:  An institutional  theory  perspective  on algorithmic  media   production  and consumption.  Communication  Theory  24(3):  340–360.  DOI:   10.1111/comt.12039.   Napoli  PM (2015)  Social  media  and the public  interest:  Governance  of news  platforms  in the realm  of  individual  and algorithmic  gatekeepers.  Telecommunications  Policy  39(9).  Elsevier:  751–760.   DOI:  10.1016/j.telpol.2014.12.003.   Napoli  PM (2019)  Social  Media  and the Public  Interest.  Media  Regulation  in the Disinformation  Age.  1st ed. New  York:  Columbia  University  Press.  DOI:  https://doi.org/10.7312/napo18454.   Netflix  (2020)  How  Netflix’s  Recommendations  System  Works.  Available  at:  https://help.netflix.com/en/node/100639  (accessed  18 April  2020).   Newman  N (2018a)  The Future  of Voice  and the Impli cations  for News . September.  Oxford.  Available   at: https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2018 -11/Newman  - Future  of  Voice  FINAL_1.pdf  (accessed  29 October  2020).   Newman  N (2018b)  Webinar:  The Future  of Voice  and the Implications  for News.  Reuters  News   Agency.  Available  at: https://www.reutersagency.com/en/reuters -community/the -future -ofvoice -report -webinar/  (accessed  29 October  2020).   Newman  N, Richard  Fletcher  W, Kalogeropoulos  A, et al. (2019)  Reuters  Institute  Digital  News  Repor t  2019 . Oxford.  Available  at: https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/inline files/DNR_2019_FINAL.pdf  (accessed  11 September  2020).   Newman  N, Fletcher  R, Schulz  A, et al. (2020)  Overview  and Key Findings  of the 2020  Digital  News   Report.  Available  at: http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/survey/2020/overview -key-findings 2020/  (accessed  11 September  2020).   Nielsen  RK (2017)  Where  do people  get their  news?  The British  media  landscape  in 5 charts.  Medium   Oxford  University , 30 May.  Oxford : Routledge.  DOI:  10.1080/1461670X.2016.1171163.   Ofcom  (2010)  Code  of Practice  on Electronic  Programme  Guides.  United  Kingdom.  Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/tv -radio -and-on-demand/broadcast -codes/epg -code.   Ofcom  (2012)  Measuring  Media  Plurality.  Ofcom’s  Advice  to the Secretary  of State  for Culture,   Olympics,  Media  and Sport.  London.   Ofcom  (2018)  EPG Prominence.  A report  on the discoverability  of PSB and local  TV services . Available   at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations -and-statements/category -1/epg -code -prominence regime.  
      62   Ofcom  (2019)  Review  of prominence  for public  service  broadcasting.  Recommendations  to  Government  for a new framework  to keep  PSB TV prominent  in an online  world . London.   Available  at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations -and-statements/category -1/epg -code prominence -regime.   Ofcom  (2020)  Small  Screen:  Big Debate  . Available  at: https://www.smallscreenbigdebate.co.uk/   (accessed  12 May  2020).   OfCom  (2018)  EPG Prominence  A report  on the discoverability  of PSB and local  TV service s. Available   at: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations -and-statements/category -1/epg -code -prominence regime.   Phillips  A and Mazzoli  EM (n.d.)  Search,  data  and targeting:  public  interest  solutions.  In: Tambini  D and  Moore  M (eds)  Dealing  with  Digital  Domin ance . London:  Oxford  University  Press.   Powell  A (2016)  Algorithms  , Accountability  , and Political  Emotion :  on the cultural  assumptions   underpinning  sentiment  analysis.  LSE Blog , July.  London.  Available  at:  https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2 016/07/20/algorithms -accountability -andpolitical -emotion/.   Powell  A, Bryne  A and Dailey  D (2010)  The Essential  Internet:  Digital  Exclusion  in Low-Income   American  Communities.  Policy  & Internet  2(2).  Wiley -Blackwell:  159–190.  DOI:  10.2202/1944 2866.1058.   Radu R (2018)  Europe’s  Public  Service  Media:  Between  Responsibility  and Accountability  - European   Journalism  Observatory  - EJO. 21 March.  Available  at: https://en.ejo.ch/media economics/accountable -and-or-responsible -public -service -media -in-europe  (accessed  6 August   2020).   Reuters  Institute  (2019)  Interactive  - Reuters  Institute  Digital  News  Report . Oxford.  Available  at:  http://www.digitalnewsreport.org/interactive/  (accessed  5 May  2020).   Roberts  ST (2019)  Behind  the Screen.  Content  Moderation  in the Shadows  of Social  Media . New  haven   and London:  Yale University  Press.  Available  at: https://www.behindthescreen -book.com/.   Scarlata  A and Lobato  R (2019)  Australian  Content  in SVOD  Catalogs:  Availability  and Discoverability .  Submission  to the Australian  and Children’s  Screen  Content  Review . Melbourne.  DOI:   10.4225/50/58225b7d49d1a.   Sky UK (2018)  Sky’s  Response  to Ofcom’s  consultation  on proposed  changes  to the linear  EPG Code   and future  of the prominence  regime . Available  at:  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/a ssets/pdf_file/0010/131203/Sky.PDF.   Spigelman  J (2013)  Defining  Public  Value  in the Age of Information  Abundance.  In: Lowe  GF and  Martin  F (eds)  The Value  of Public  Service  Media . Gothenburg:  Nordicom,  pp. 43–56. Available   at:  https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu /viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.738.9565&rep=rep1&type=pdf#pag e=59.   Sterling  G (2018)  Survey:  82 percent  of smartphone  shoppers  conduct  ‘near  me’ searches.  Available   at: https://searchengineland.com/survey -82-percent -of-smartphone -shoppers -conduct -near me-searches -304512  (accessed  23 June  2020).   Sutton  K (2020)  Pandemic -Related  Movies  and Shows  Are Surging  on Netflix.  Available  at:  https://www.adweek.com/tv -video/pandemic -related -programming -surges -on-netflix -amid coronavirus -spread/  (accessed  30 July 2020).      
      63   Sweney  M and Conlan  T (2019)  Netflix  to spend  $500m  on British -made  TV shows  and films  | Media  |  The Guardian.  The Guardian , 20 September.  London.  Available  at:  https://www.theguardian.com/media/2019/sep/20/netflix -spend -500m -british -made -tv-shows films  (accessed  16 June  2020).   Tambini  D (2001)  Communications:  Revolution  and Reform . London:  he Institute  for Public  Policy   Research.   Tambini  D (2004)  The passing  of paternalism:  public  service  television  and increasing  channel  choice.   In: Tambini  D and Cowling  J (eds)  From  Public  Service  Broadcasting  to Public  Service   Communications . London:  Institute  for public  policy  research,  pp. 46–60.  Tambini  D (2016)  Digital  intermediaries  in the UK: implications  for news  plurality.  ISSN  0959 -3845  (In  Press) : 0–22. DOI:  10.1021/nl803600v.   Tambini  D and Labo  S (2016)  Digital  intermediaries  in the UK: implications  for news  plurality.  Digital   Policy,  Regulation  and Governance  18(4):  33–58. DOI:  10.1108/info -12-2015 -0056.   Tambini  D and Moore  M (2019)  Dealing  with  digital  domin ance  . Media@LSE , 5 December.  London.   Available  at: https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/medialse/2019/12/05/dealing -with -digital -dominance/   (accessed  16 June  2020).   Van Der Sloot  B (2012)  Walking  a Thin  Line:  The Regulation  of EPGs.  JIPITEC : 138–147.  Available  at:  http://nbn -resolving.  (accessed  28 April  2020).   Wolfe  E and Ries B (2019)  Sacha  Baron  Cohen  calls  social  media  ‘the greatest  propaganda  machine  in  history’  - CNN.  Available  at: https://edition.cnn.com/2019/11/22/business/sacha -baron -cohen speech -social -media -propaganda trnd/index.html?utm_medium=social&utm_source=twCNN&utm_content=2019 -1122T22%3A37%3A32&utm_term=video  (accessed  12 June  2020).   Woodard  CY and Jason  BC (2008)  The Architecture  of Platforms:  A Unified  View . Journal  of Polymer   Science,  Part B: Polymer  Physics . DOI:  10.1002/polb.10065.   Wu T (2018)  The Curse  of Bigness:  Antitrust  in the New  Gilded  Age. Columbia  Global  Reports.   Yeung  K (2017)  ‘Hypernudge’:  Big Data  as a mode  of regulation  by design.  Information   Communication  and Society . DOI:  10.1080/1369118X.2016.1186713.   Yeung  K (2019)  Responsibility  and AI. Council  of Europe  Study  DGI(2019)05 . Strasbourg.  Available  at:  https:/ /rm.coe.int/responsability -and-ai-en/168097d9c5.  
The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading human  rights organisation. It comprises 47 member states,  including all members of the European Union. All Council  of Europe member states have signed up to the European  Convention on Human Rights, a treaty designed to  protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law.  The European Court of Human Rights oversees the  implementation of the Convention in the member states.ENG PREMS 140220 www.coe.intWhilst the freedom of expression implications of content takedown, “privatised censorship” and down-ranking  of content have been much discussed in recent  years, content curation practices like up-ranking  and prioritisation have been under less scrutiny. Yet content moderation and curation are  two sides of the same coin and they both deter mine which content is circulated and accessed  online. In contemporary media systems, routes for  accessing audio-visual media content online are  more complex than the channels and electronic  programmes guides (EPGs) typical of linear distribution. As media consumption shifts onto a range of  on-demand, mobile, social and streaming services,  the role of hardware devices, operating systems,  users’ interface design, and related search and  discovery functions becomes pivotal in nudging  audiences’ choices and ultimately driving access to  and consumption of content. The aim of this report  is to provide a clearer understanding of what prior itisation of public interest content means in an  internet-distributed ecosystem, discuss emerging  issues with current industry practices in this area,  and highlight related policy needs, and potential  avenues for intervention. www.coe.int/freedomofexpression
