Data for the  Benefit of the  People Recommendations from  the Danish Expert Group  on Data Ethics The Expert Group on  November 2018 DATA ETHICS
Contents Development requires us to think Data ethics value compass  9 recommendations for data ethics  Council for Data Ethics   The data ethics oath   Dynamic toolbox for data ethics   Declaration of companies' data ethics policies   A data ethics seal   National knowledge boost on data ethics   Denmark as a frontrunner in data ethics   Stimulating innovation and entrepreneurship    with a focus on data ethics   Data ethics in public sector procurement    The Expert Group on Data Ethics' mission and working method The data ethics oath3 7 10 11 14 16 18 21 23 27 29 3331 36
3  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations We currently find ourselves at a point in history where technology  and data volumes have developed to such an extent that they  provide us with almost endless opportunities, both in our society  and in the business community. But right now, we also need to  watch our step if we are to ensure that our technological progress  achieves the common goals we set ourselves as a society and as  citizens. Losing focus here could have serious consequences, which  could easily overwhelm us. Data, data analysis, business intelligence, big data, advanced analytics, deep learning and artificial intelligence could potentially  deliver major benefits for individual citizens, consumers, organisations, companies and society as a whole. Digital technologies and  data use could lead to a significant shift both in the way citizens,  consumers and companies interact, and in the way in which companies recruit, work, collaborate and compete . Table 1: Data communication via the Internet per minute, 2018Development requires  us to think 187 MIO emails  sent67 voice-first devices sold 38 MIO What’s App messages sent 18 MIO text messages sent 2,4 MIO snaps sent 1,1 MIO Tinder swipes 973.000 logins on Facebook936.000 views  on Twitch$862.823 spent online481.000 tweets sent375.000 apps downloaded266.000  hours viewed on Netflix174.000  scrolls on Instagram25.000  GIFs  sent on Messenger 4,3 MIO videoes shown  on YouTube 3,7 MIO searches on Google60 seconds on the InternetBased on a graphic originally designed by @LoriLewis and  @Offi   ciallyChadd. Source: wearesocial.com/us/blog/2018/01/globaldigitalreport-2018
4  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Using digital solutions and data presents a number of ethical  dilemmas. If data is to be exploited to its full potential, it is essential  that we, as a society, trust that our data is being used responsibly. In Denmark, we have a high level of digitisation readiness and we  are good at exploiting new opportunities. Denmark is also a nation  that builds on values such as trust, democracy, responsibility and  self-determination. Denmark is therefore well-placed to become  a digital frontrunner, which is why we also have a particular  responsibility to make an impact on European and international  developments. Denmark has a strong foundation from which we  can spearhead the work with data ethics. The debate on data ethics is wide-ranging. It concerns the use of data  both by the public and private sectors, the large tech giants and their  dominant market positions, the fusion of our critical infrastructure via  the Internet, micro-targeting users, fake news and a number of other  issues which, in the worst case scenario, could pose a challenge to  our democracy. The Expert Group has focused on how companies can handle the  ethical challenges of using data, cf. the commission for the Expert  Group on Data Ethics. The Expert Group is fully aware that the public “Senior executives highlight consumer trust  as an essential competitive parameter.”     ——ALTIMETER (2015), THE TRUST IMPERATIVE: A FRAMEWORK FOR ETHICAL DATA USE“If data is the new oil then   data ethics is the new green”   ——ÅSE ZETTERBERG, CHIEF DIGITAL OFFICER,   SWEDISH MINISTRY OF ENTERPRISE AND INNOVATION
5  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations debate on data ethics is also heavily focused on data ethics in the  public sector. The Expert Group therefore believes that we also need  to address data ethics issues in the public sector.  Health is an area that has received particular focus when it comes to  the potential of using data. The use of health data can, in many cases,  be of great benefit to patients, efficiency in the healthcare sector  and the life science industry. Safeguarding patients' health data and  ensuring it is not misused is essential for gaining citizens' continued  support and trust when it comes to collecting health data. Health  data has therefore been a specific focus area for the Expert Group. Working with data ethics is both a sprint and a marathon. The Expert  Group is now taking its first steps with a number of specific and  actionable recommendations on data ethics, so that companies can  start to tackle data ethics dilemmas. The Expert Group's ambition is  to formulate recommendations that will help companies make an  abstract concept more tangible. The Group began by preparing and  navigating this area using a basic value compass: The Expert Group believes that responsible decisions from companies  require qualified knowledge and insight. That is why the recommenda tions also include measures to build awareness and transparency in  the wider public around data ethics. This concerns both consumers,  who need to learn to make demands on services and navigate new  opportunities, and companies, who need to take responsibility and  spot the business potential of responsible data use. It is important that data ethics retains a high position on the national  and international agenda. Several of the recommendations focus on  ensuring this. The Expert Group's draft recommendations for data ethics were “Denmark could create a gold   standard for data ethics. ”    ——SACHIN LODHA, TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES, INDIEN
6  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations discussed by the Danish Disruption Council on 13 September 2018.  This is the Expert Group's final report and recommendations, hereby  forwarded to the Danish government. A unanimous Expert Group presents the following recommendations  on data ethics.
7  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Data Ethics Value  Compass Data ethics is defined as an active decision and action to ensure  that knowledge obtained through data is not used against the  legitimate interests of an individual or group. With data ethics, organisations work actively to address data ethics issues in design,  innovation and business processes. When we talk about data ethics  in relation to companies, responsibility lies beyond what is stated  in data protection legislation (e.g. GDPR). Data ethics is about  doing the right thing, even when no one is watching. As a basis for  the implementation of data ethics in practice, the Expert Group  has identified a number of overarching values to inform their work. This means that: 1. The following values must act as the foundation for the  design of data driven systems, 2. The following values are to be the foundation of new  policy and possible legislation, and 3. The following values must be integrated into daily activity  around data and use of data driven systems. “Ethical behavior is about doing the right  thing even when no one is watching – even  when doing the wrong thing is legal.”     ——SACHIN LODHA, TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES, INDIEN (Originally coined by Aldo Leopold)
8  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations SELFDETERMINATION People must retain the most  control possible over their  own data. DIGNITY  Human dignity  outweighs profit. RESPONSIBILITY  All sides must be responsible  for the consequences of their  technological solutions.EQUALITY AND  FAIRNESS Technology must  not discriminate. PROGRESSIVENESS Societal progress in using  data can be achieved though  data ethical solutions. DIVERSITY When developing  technological solutions,  involve as many trade groups  of diff  erent genders, ages,  ethnicities etc. as possible.
9  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations SELF-DETERMINATION People's self-determination must be prioritised in all data process es. It is the individual person who should have the ultimate control  over what their data is used for and in which contexts. DIGNITY Human dignity must be respected in all data processes, i.e. data  should not be used to exploit knowledge against the user's longterm interests. This includes, for example, use of the latest new  technology and encryption methods to protect privacy data from  leaks and misuse, and organisational processes any data analysis and correlation that protect people from discrimination and  misuse of their data. RESPONSIBILITY Responsibility is a company's “due diligence” in relation to data  collection and processing. Responsibility and co-responsibility  must therefore exist in all links of the data processing chain. This  includes co-responsibility from business partners and third-party  processing and any future data storage. EQUALITY AND FAIRNESS Strive for a fair balance in data processing. When using machine  learning and algorithms for processing data, active work is being  done to prevent undesired bias in data (such as when manually sort ing and tidying data), as well as to work towards designs that avoid  categorisation that discriminates between e.g. population groups.  In regard to this, the rationale and criteria for methods that reduce  bias and discrimination will always be explicit and open to revision. PROGRESSIVENESS Advanced data use can help bring significant progress to our society. To achieve this progress, technical and organisational solutions  need to be created to support ethically-responsible data processing. DIVERSITY Diversity (demographic and professional) in teams working with  data systems is essential. Diversity helps ensure a mix of skills,  beyond the purely technical, for identifying and tackling the so cial and ethical consequences of data processing, and to ensure  that a representative section of the needs, values and interests of  population groups in society is taken into account right from the  start when data systems are designed.
9 recommendations on data ethics The Expert Group recommends the following: 1. COUNCIL FOR DATA ETHICS  The government needs to establish an  independent Council for Data Ethics. The  purpose of the council is to support an  ongoing focus on data ethics.  2. THE DATA ETHICS OATH Company directors and employees  actively address and take responsibility for  questions and dilemmas around data ethics  by taking a data ethics oath.6. NATIONAL  KNOWLEDGE BOOST The knowledge and insight into data ethics  issues of the general population and the  business community need to be boosted  so that we as a society gain a greater  understanding of the opportunities and  consequences of using data. 7. DENMARK AS A  FRONTRUNNER Denmark should be visible in and impact  European and global development in data  ethics by being a frontrunner  on the international scene. 8. STIMULATING INNOVATION  AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP Innovation and entrepreneurship with a  focus on new data ethics business models  are stimulated through co-financing,  earmarking of funds  and innovation contests. 9. DATA ETHICS IN PUBLIC  SECTOR PROCUREMENT It must be a requirement that digital  solutions that are procured or developed  by the public sector are data-ethical, so  that the public sector drives demand for  innovative and data-ethical solutions  from companies.3. DYNAMIC TOOLBOX The dynamic toolbox for data ethics  should support the oath and provide tools  and aids to help raise awareness and for  specific activities in Danish companies. 4. DECLARATION OF  COMPANIES' DATA ETHICS  POLICIES Denmark should be the first country in  the world to demand that its biggest  companies incorporate an outline of their  data ethics policies in their management  reviews as part of their annual  financial statement. 5. A DATA ETHICS SEAL A data ethics seal should be introduced  as proof that a product meets data ethics  requirements. A data ethics seal would  make it easier for consumers to navigate  digital products, and for companies to  identify responsible partners.
11  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Council for Data Ethics The government should establish an   independent Council for Data Ethics.Recommendation no. 1 PURPOSE The purpose of the Council for Data Ethics is: • To support innovation that focuses on new data ethical  business models. • To support the use of data ethics in the Danish business  community, so that more companies work consciously  and purposefully with data ethics. • To work towards ensuring that a responsible approach  to data ethics becomes a competitive advantage, both  locally and internationally.  • To work towards ensuring that data ethics in the private  sector tie in with data ethics in the public sector. HOW Members of the council will act as ambassadors for data ethics in 
12  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations the business community and should represent a cross-section of skills  and experience within areas such as technology, business operations,  philosophy and ethics. The council must: • Build up specialist knowledge and gain insight into current  issues surrounding data ethics. • Support innovation that focuses on new data ethics business  models, such as through innovation contests, cf. recommendation no. 8. • Provide recommendations for e.g. the Danish Growth Fund,  Trade Council and the new Danish Business centres about  how to stimulate product and business development by  earmarking resources for data ethics concepts, as well as  screening the concepts based on a data ethics angle, cf. recommendation no. 8. • Develop, update and ensure visibility of the data ethics oath  and the data ethics toolbox, cf. recommendations 2 and 3, to  ensure continual support of the objective of the recommendations.  • Help develop a data ethics seal, cf. recommendation no. 5. • Advise the government on issues relating to data ethics and  our critical data infrastructure within certain sectors, such as  transport, utilities and communication. • Investigate data ethical dilemmas in different industries, such  as the healthcare sector. The area of health data contains  major health and innovation potential if data is used appropriately for research and development. However, there are important considerations to be made regarding data sharing,  anonymising, encrypting, ownership of one’s own health data  and, secure data processing. • With an outward focus, both nationally and internationally, promote debate-stimulating activities that contribute to  public awareness and increased knowledge within the area,  cf. recommendations 6 and 7. • Initiate recommendations for new measures that push companies towards ever more conscious and responsible data  processing and data use.
“Why would ethics ever be a finished task in  business? It is an ongoing human project.”     ——SHANNON VALLOR, PROFESSOR – DEPARTMENT OF PHILOSOPHY, SANTA CLARA UNIVERSITY13  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations • Submit an annual report to the government, explaining  what has happened in the area in recent years, including  any recommendations and activities the council has launched. • The council must plan its work in such a way that it is incorporated with data ethics in the public sector. • The council must plan its work so that it is incorporated  with other relevant initiatives. As the council works within  an area that is constantly developing, the council's tasks  must be regularly assessed and adapted. WHY Data use in the business community is developing rapidly. This is  why it is essential to maintain an ongoing focus on the connection  between advanced data use and trust in the fact that companies  are processing data responsibly, to create opportunities for innovation and growth. The above requires a long-term anchoring of  relevant initiatives and knowledge-building. If sustainable data use is to be a competitive parameter for Danish companies, there must be a sustained focus on converting the  business community, including developing new business models  that are data ethical. Based on its mission, the Expert Group has worked solely with the  business-oriented aspect of data ethics. The recommendation for  a Council for Data Ethics also has this focus. The Expert Group is  fully aware that the public debate on data ethics also involves the  public sector. The Expert Group has also found similarities between  data ethics in the private and public sectors, and that issues relat ing to data ethics cannot always be separated. The Expert Group  therefore believes that it is essential to also address data ethics  issues in the public sector.
14  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations The data ethics oath Company directors and employees who work with  data must take an oath on data ethics.Recommendation no. 2 PURPOSE The purpose of the data ethics oath is: • For company directors and professionals who work with  data use to consciously address and take responsibility  for data ethical questions and dilemmas. • For company directors and their employees to take ownership of a company culture that is built on conscious  decisions that ensure sustainable data use. • To give companies a specific, accessible tool for launching important internal discussions around data ethics  and responsibility, with both new and existing employees. • To enable the company to prove that responsibility and 
15  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations awareness around data is a high priority both internally  and externally. HOW With the data ethics oath, companies and the individual employees  acknowledge that they will help put data ethics on the agenda  and continually ask questions that ensure that decisions regarding  advanced data use and artificial intelligence are made on a wellinformed and ethically aware basis. The Expert Group's proposal for the data ethics oath, which the  Council for Data Ethics is responsible for developing and updating,  can be found in Appendix 1, “The data ethics oath".  The toolbox for data ethics, cf. recommendation 3, will include  guidelines to help understand and comply with the individual  statements in the oath. The Council for Data Ethics is responsible for maintaining the  oath's content, ensuring that it follows all developments in the area  and is thus updated as required so that it supports the overall  purpose of the oath. The Council is also responsible for spreading  and generating interest in the oath, such as by highlighting those  companies working actively with the oath. WHY The data ethics oath should help ensure that data ethics values are  an active and integrated part of the culture in companies that work  with data. By taking the oath, company directors and professionals  working with data undertake to work responsibly when processing  data and displaying it to the outside world.“Ethics is knowing the difference between what  you have a right to do and what is right to do. ”     ——SACHIN LODHA, TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES, INDIEN (Originally coined by Potter Stewart)
16  /  DATA I MENNESKETS TJENESTE Anbefalinger fra Ekspertgruppen om dataetik Dynamic toolbox  for data ethicsRecommendation no. 3 Setting up a dynamic toolbox for data ethics. PURPOSE The purpose of the toolbox is to give professionals and companies  specific tools, updated guidelines and recommendations that make  it easy to incorporate and take action on data ethics in connection  with products, projects and general day-to-day work. HOW A data ethics toolbox should contain the following elements: • Guidelines on how to make data ethics decisions in companies, cf. recommendation no. 2 regarding the data  ethics oath. • Practical information and guide for e.g. using big data,  creating algorithms and designing IT systems.
17  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations • Specific examples of how other companies have worked  with data ethics, and how data ethics can be used as a  competitive advantage. • A template and guide for management reporting on data  ethics. • A collection of relevant links for research and best  practice. • Online tools for checking companies' data ethics  maturity. Companies are advised to develop competence development tracks  around data ethics, identify data ethics dilemmas and issues and  develop conscious and ethically correct data processing methods  for new products and daily operations. Competence tracks should  apply to new recruits and be an ongoing part of skills development  for existing employees. The data ethics toolbox could serve as a  training tool here. The format of the data ethics toolbox must be digital, and its  content must be under constant development. The format of  the toolbox should take into account companies' different needs  for information and guidance, depending on their industry, size,  skillsets and experience. The Council for Data Ethics is responsible  for establishing and maintaining the toolbox. WHY There is a need to quickly implement specific initiatives so that  companies can start to tackle existing data ethical dilemmas as  well as any that may develop as data use increases. The Expert  Group has aimed to make a very abstract concept more actionable. As part of the work with the data ethics oath, cf. recommendation  no. 2, and the national data ethics knowledge boost, cf.  recommendation no. 6, company directors and professionals who  work with data need somewhere they can easily access specific  tools and knowledge around data ethics in their everyday work. A  data ethics toolbox would support this work.
18  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Declaration of  companies' data  ethics policies Every year, companies should declare their data  ethics policy in accordance with the Danish  Financial Statements Act.Recommendation no. 4 PURPOSE The purpose of extending the management review as part of the  annual financial statement to include a statement on data ethics is: • For Denmark to be the first country in the world to  demand that its biggest companies actively address and  take responsibility for their work with data. • To create an incentive for working actively with data 
19  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations ethics as a competitive parameter and to create transparency in the area, such as for investors and other companies. This would provide a first-mover advantage and  create a breeding ground for new data ethics models to  form. HOW In the management review, companies must provide a statement  on their work with data ethics by explaining the extent to which  they have chosen to focus on data ethics in their business activities.  The recommendation will require a change to the Danish Financial  Statements Act.  Companies that are not affected by the Danish Financial Statements  Act are encouraged to voluntarily give a statement regarding their  work with data ethics. WHY There is a need for data ethics solutions and visibility in how  companies should work with data ethics. A major challenge is that  companies, investors etc. struggle to see which companies use  data in an ethically responsible way. There is still no common understanding, nationally or internationally, of how a company should work responsibly with data and  technology. The debate on data ethics is similar to the debate  about companies' corporate social responsibility (CSR), which was  a major part of the globalisation debate in the 1990s and 2000s.  This was a time when companies' social responsibility and produc tion conditions with sub-contractors around the world were heavily  scrutinised. The increased international division of labour raised  questions about responsible growth, but it was hard to define exactly what each company needed to do. Allowing the individual  company to declare their own policy avoids pre-defining what the  company should do, instead encouraging transparency and market-related pressure from other companies, including investors  and suppliers. Since 2009, around 1,200 of Denmark's biggest companies have  been obliged by the Danish Financial Statements Act to provide  statements on their work with corporate social responsibility in  their management review. This includes how their business strategy  and business activities take into account areas such as human 
20  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations rights, climate and the environment. This recommendation will oblige companies to explain to  whether or not they have chosen to focus on data ethics in their  business activities. The recommendation builds on a known and  established method for companies in their work with corporate  social responsibility, which is therefore also a benefit. The  recommendation also supports Denmark's position as a leading  role model in the work on data ethics.
21  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations A data ethics seal  A data ethics seal should be introduced as proof  that a product meets data ethical requirements.Recommendation no. 5 PURPOSE The purpose of a data ethics seal is to: • Make it easier for consumers to navigate between companies, websites, apps, services and products and to give  consumers the option to select a data-ethical alternative. • To reduce the complexity for both consumers choosing  companies and for companies choosing sub-contractors. • To make it attractive for the individual company to  process data in an ethically responsible way and therefore  support data ethics as a competitive advantage. • In the short-term, it is recommended that Denmark lead  with a national seal, but in the longer term, it would be important to develop a European or global seal that gives  consumers in all countries the chance to identify compani-
22  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations es that process data responsibly in an otherwise immeasurable digital market. HOW The seal should be visible on all company websites and on  individual products or services, such as purchases in app stores.  The requirements that a company would need to meet to  obtain a data ethics seal should be based on common industry  standards, certifications or similar. The seal should contain  principles for ethical data processing and be regularly updated  to remain relevant. It is essential that the business community  takes ownership of the data ethics seal. It is recommended that  the seal is developed together with and anchored in the Council  for Data Ethics, cf. recommendation no. 1, and that it builds on  work carried out with other seal schemes, such as the e-mark  e-commerce seal, which is run by a partnership between business  organisations, user organisations and professional organisations.  The seal design needs to take into account interfaces with other  seal or certification schemes, as well as the fact that it will need  to be developed into a European or global seal in the long-term. WHY Consumers struggle to see which companies use data in an  ethically responsible manner, and which companies do not. The  same applies to companies choosing sub-contractors. The data  ethics seal makes it easier to navigate for all parties. “We don’t know enough about the technology that we  are using. It is often like fast-food. We get a box with  very low nutritional value and consume it without  thinking too much about it. We don’t know if they are  harvesting data in unethical ways.”     — —TARIQ KRIM, ENTREPRENEUR AND FORMER DIGITAL ADVISOR TO EMMANUEL MACRON
23  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Recommendation no. 6 National knowledge  boost on data ethics National and local initiatives will increase the  population's knowledge and insight into data  ethics issues. PURPOSE The purpose of a national boost in knowledge regarding data  ethics is for us as a society to develop our understanding of how  data is created and what it is used for. The knowledge boost should focus on: • Increasing insight into data ethics issues.  • Creating awareness about the consequences of general  use of the digital world.
24  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations • Starting a debate around the expectations consumers  should have of companies that have access to data generated by consumers' own digital life. • Contribute to a wider societal debate about the issues  caused by the use of data and artificial intelligence in  areas such as health. HOW The knowledge should focus on four areas – educational institutions,  research, companies and the public debate – and should be  coordinated with and preferably integrated into existing initiatives. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS It is recommended that science education be  increased, with a focus on ethics and philosophy, across all educations and levels of education, right from primary school where pupils need to learn to navigate responsibly when  using new technology, to students who, via an  interdisciplinary approach to learning, need to  understand that they are contributing to a digital society with many data ethics pitfalls. There is a general need at all levels of the educational system for a obligatory knowledge  boost that explains what data is, how it is used,  how consumers and citizens navigate their  data and what the consequences for the individual and society are of opting in or out. RESEARCH Resources should be allocated for interdisciplinary research into data ethics and data  use, including privacy-by-design and data ethics-by-design, to support the general societal  knowledge boost and awareness raising.COMPANIES By taking the data ethics oath, cf. recommendation no. 2, and using the toolbox for data  ethics, cf. recommendation no. 3, companies  can launch specific initiatives to achieve a  knowledge boost among both managers and  employees.  THE PUBLIC DEBATE National information campaigns and events  should be launched to spread knowledge of  data ethics. The campaigns must be supported by public service media.
25  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations It is therefore proposed that one day a year, perhaps under the  headline DigiTalSammen (“DigiTalk Together”), there is a national  focus on data ethics at all levels of society, from primary schools  to Parliament and in the media, via events, debate, themed work,  conferences and similar.  The Expert Group also proposes allocating resources for  developing digital tools to make data ethical dilemmas relevant  and accessible, such as tools that enable you to “play” your way  through ethical issues. WHY We are still learning to navigate the digital world and trying to  understand the expected and unexpected consequences of using  the digital services that we surround ourselves with on a dayto-day basis. There are numerous examples of how data from  unconcerned users of “free” services becomes the real product in  a company's business model, without the user's knowledge.  New ways of communicating via digital platforms lead to ethical  challenges regarding what you can and cannot share, and what  privacy actually means. In some cases, we risk data being used in a way and scope that we  do not want to be a part of. In other contexts, we want data to be  used as widely as possible, because it could help us. We have rights to our own data, but does everyone else also have  rights to our data? What are the new social contracts and what  is the new balance between the individual and the community? This is relevant in e.g. the area of health, where some believe that it  is in everyone's best interests for health data to be made available  for researching and developing new treatments. As a society, we need to learn to navigate the digital world and to  remain critical of where we believe the boundary should be between  data use and good digital ethics. This is why we need a national knowledge boost, where we as a  society develop our basic understanding of how data is created 
26  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations and what it is used for, and how we strike a balance between the  individual and the community. “Teaching ethics to technologists is  particularly critical because they are  building the systems that impact millions  of people’s life. They need to understand  something about the consequences of the  decisions they are making. ”     — —MEHRAN SAHAMI, PROFESSOR – COMPUTER SCIENCE, STANFORD
27  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Denmark as a  frontrunner in   data ethics  Denmark leads the way and focuses on  international data ethics.Recommendation no.  7 PURPOSE The purpose of this recommendation is to ensure that, as the  digital frontrunner, Denmark helps to impact European and global  developments in data ethics. HOW Denmark works actively with data ethics on an international scale.  This is to be achieved via e.g. an annual international data ethics 
28  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations summit in Denmark, an annual data ethics award to be given to a  company that has made extraordinary progress in data ethics, and  working with an international index that measures digital readiness  with a focus on data ethics, as well as actively working on global  standards for data ethics and algorithmic trustworthiness. Denmark also needs to work actively to promote the Danish  approach to data ethics in international fora, such as the EU,  OECD, UN and World Economic Forum, with the goal of to creating  international solutions to an international problem. Creating a communications and branding strategy around  Denmark as a frontrunner in data ethics should form part of this  effort. WHY As a digital pioneer, Denmark has an excellent opportunity to  help impact European and international developments towards  a more responsible use of technology and data. Values such as  trust, democracy and self-determination permeate Danish society.  By taking the lead internationally, Denmark can ensure that these  Danish values help shape the long-term international solutions in  the area. The Expert Group believes that large parts of the Danish business  community would support the data ethics agenda and be able to  utilise data ethics as a competitive advantage in global markets.  The long-term goal is to promote a Danish approach to data ethics  in an international context. “I am really happy to see a data ethics  initiative being put into action (the first of  its kind?). I applaud Denmark for having  such foresight to tackle this issue today.”     ——SHOMIT GHOSE, VENTURE CAPITALIST, SILICON VALLEY
29  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Stimulating innovation  and entrepreneurship  with a focus on data  ethics Innovation and entrepreneurship with a focus on  data ethics concepts must be stimulated.Recommendation no.  8 PURPOSE The purpose of stimulating innovation and entrepreneurship with  a focus on data ethics is to develop new business models that can  utilise the opportunities that arise nationally and internationally  as more and more consumers become interested in data ethical  solutions.DKK
30  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations HOW The government needs to concentrate on kickstarting new data  ethical business models by supporting the Danish entrepreneurial  ecosystem with a special focus on data ethics. For example, the  government could co-finance events, conversational salons and  other private initiatives that strengthen the ecosystem and focus  on data ethics. Additionally, through the existing business and inno vation policy instruments in resources such as the Danish Growth  Fund, the government could stimulate product and business development by earmarking funds for data ethical concepts and  screening concepts that actively incorporate a data ethics angle. Different types of innovation contests should also be launched in  order to stimulate idea development and gather new, fresh skills  from different areas of expertise. A particularly interesting tool for supporting development in data  ethics is innovation contests in the form of challenges. A challenge  is a problem that is presented to an open audience, who partici pate by offering solutions. A challenge clarifier could be a private  company or a public organisation. By taking part in a challenge, a  company, association or other organisation can help impact the  agenda for Danish innovation, provide new inspiration, and con tribute thoughts and knowledge to other people's ideas. The existing platform challenges.dk already provides an opportunity for  targeted activities. But data ethics issues can also be offered in  other contexts, to give companies incentives to develop innovative  solutions, including new business models based on data ethics. WHY A strong business community doesn't happen by itself. By focusing  on kickstarting new data ethical business models, business support  can be provided to a new and budding industry. This will help make  data ethics a competitive parameter by giving Danish companies  the opportunity to develop data ethical business models, which will  allow consumers and businesses to opt for data ethical alternatives. This avoids the formation of data monopolies and situations  where consumers and companies have no choice.
31  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations Data ethics in public  sector procurement Digital solutions bought or developed by the  public sector must be data-ethical.Recommendation no. 9 PURPOSE The purpose is for the public sector to drive and create demand  for innovative data ethics solutions. This will help create a private  market for new responsible business models, to the benefit of  Danish companies. HOW The government, municipalities and regions must be required to  only buy or develop digital solutions that are data-ethical. This is  achieved by imposing specific system requirements on matters  such as building transparency into IT systems for advanced data  use, or requirements for proof of how a given result has come to  light. Another requirement could be for any digital services bought  or developed by the government, municipalities and regions to  carry the data ethics seal.DKK DKK DKK
32  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations WHY There is a particular challenge to promoting data ethics  entrepreneurs and new business models, as public digitisation  solutions are often offered in very large supply, which may make  it difficult for new, smaller companies to help develop innovative  solutions of the future. Through strong demand, the public can help stimulate a market  for data ethical solutions. This would establish a breeding ground  for new data-ethical-by-design solutions, where Danish companies  would achieve a competitive advantage that could subsequently  be utilized on a global scale.
33  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations The Expert Group on  Data Ethics' mission  and working method The Danish Expert Group on Data Ethics was set up in March 2018  based on a decision by the Danish Disruption Council. The Expert  Group's task was to discuss how companies could handle the  ethical challenges linked to the use of data and the new digital  business models that are constantly evolving, and to propose  recommendations that could contribute to the responsible  and sustainable use of data in the business community. The  recommendations had to contribute to ensuring a strong framework  for companies so that Denmark maintains a competitive and  digital private sector which is ready for future challenges. Members of the Expert Group represent relevant skills in data  ethics, technology use and company management. The Expert Group has prioritised an active societal debate on  the responsible and sustainable use of data. Questions about  what constitutes good data ethics and what kind of world we  want are best answered by first having a societal debate. To this  end, the Expert Group held a number of open meetings, known  as conversation salons, at e.g. the People's Political Festival, to  gather knowledge and input from interested citizens, companies,  researchers and other external experts in the area. Data ethics was  also one of the main topics at the Techfestival in Copenhagen at  the start of September 2018. Finally, the Expert Group's Chair has  been active in the public debate on data ethics, including holding  meetings with and giving presentations to a number of interest  groups, and has even been on research trips to India and America  to discuss data ethics with a wide range of experts. To provide full transparency of the process, the Expert Group 
34  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations launched a website – dataetikdk.dk – with continuous updates on  the progress of the work in the Expert Group as well as a dedicated  e-mail address - dataetik@erst.dk – by which the public has been  able to add their input. The Expert Group has worked according to the following principles: INVOLVEMENT The Expert Group wants to work actively with and get input from  a wide number of stakeholders. Involvement is through open  conversation salons, an open mailbox and the Chair reaching out  to companies and organisations. TRANSPARENCY It's important that the Expert Group's work is easy to understand  and that it is easy to contribute to, find information about and talk  to the group about data ethics. This is why the public is invited  to get involved and why many aspects of the group's work are  documented on the group's blog at dataetikdk.dk and on social  media. DIVERSITY The composition of the Expert Group and other experts, influencers  and participants should be diverse to ensure that diff  erent voices  and perspectives are represented and heard. CHALLENGE It is essential for the Expert Group to challenge perspectives,  norms and habitual thinking in all phases of their work, so that  their output is strong and innovative, and so that everyone who  has taken part in the process has learned something new.
35  /  DATA FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE Recommendations EXPERT GROUP'S MEMBERS Christiane Vejlø, Chair CEO Elektronista Media Alice Borgen Country Manager IBM Hybrid Cloud Erik David Johnson Principal AI Specialist at Delegate Gregers Wedell-Wedellsborg CEO of Matas Gry Hasselbalch Co-founder of the DataEthicsEU think tank Henrik Iskov Christensen Professor and director for the Institute for Contextual Robotics,  UC San Diego Mikkel Holm Sørensen CEO of KL.7 Morten Primdahl Co-founder of Zedensk Pernille Erenbjerg CEO of TDC Steen Rasmussen Professor and centre manager at the University of Southern  Denmark Thomas Damkjær Petersen Chairman of engineering association IDA Thomas Madsen-Mygdal CEO for TwentyThree Design: malenehald.dk 
The data ethics oath In our company, we take an active stance on questions and dilemmas  concerning data ethics in order to make informed decisions on  sustainable data use. As a company, we will prioritize responsible data use. This means  that we will actively address the following questions:  - 1 How can we work with privacy-by-design and minimize the collection of  unnecessary data when creating new products? - 2 -  What measures do we take to ensure that our use of data is not  discriminatory or biased on the grounds of sex, ethnicity or social  groups? - 3 How do we work with data in an open and transparent manner? - 4 -  How do we ensure that data is not used in a way that misleads  users or creates addiction? - 5 How do we work to ensure that users derive maximum value from the  data that we collect on them? - 6 Who benefits from the decisions that we take, who are they a  disadvantage for, and who can inadvertently exploit them? - 7 -  Do our data professionals teams reflect the necessary level of diversity  (in terms of skill, environment, and professional background)? - 8 How do we ensure that we have the necessary know-how and that we  remain up-to-date with respect to issues in data ethics? - 9 -  How do third parties handle the data that they process for us?
Ekspertgruppen om D ATAETIK Design: malenehald.dk
