










































Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027) - European Education Area









Skip to main content








enEnglishCloseSelect your languageOfficial EU languagesбългарскиespañolCzechdanskDeutscheestiελληνικάEnglishfrançaisIrishhrvatskiItalianlatviešulietuviųHungarianMalteseNederlandspolskiportuguêsromânăslovenčinaslovenščinasuomisvenska


Menu




European Education Area
Quality education and training for all

















Close

















You are here: 


Home


Focus topics


Digital education


Digital Education Action Plan
































Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027)








Enlarge


 














What is the Digital Education Action Plan?
The Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027) is a renewed European Union (EU) policy initiative that sets out a common vision of high-quality, inclusive and accessible digital education in Europe, and aims to support the adaptation of the education and training systems of Member States to the digital age.
The Action Plan, adopted on 30 September 2020, is a call for greater cooperation at European level on digital education to address the challenges and opportunities of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to present opportunities for the education and training community (teachers, students), policy makers, academia and researchers on national, EU and international level.
The initiative contributes to the Commission’s priority ‘A Europe fit for the Digital Age’ and to Next Generation EU. It also supports the Recovery and Resilience Facility, which aims to create a greener, more digital and resilient European Union.
The Digital Education Action Plan is a key enabler to realising the vision of achieving a European Education Area by 2025. It contributes to achieving the goals of the European Skills Agenda, the European Social Pillar Action Plan and the ‘2030 Digital Compass: the European way for the Digital Decade’.
To inform the proposal, from July to September 2020, the Commission launched an open public consultation to gather the views and experiences of all citizens, institutions and organisations.
The actions of the Digital Education Action Plan
The Digital Education Plan sets out two strategic priorities and fourteen actions to support them:
Priority 1: Fostering the development of a high-performing digital education ecosystem
What will the European Commission do to achieve this?

Action 1: Structured Dialogue with Member States on digital education and skills

	
Action 1: Council recommendation on the key enabling factors for successful digital education and training


Action 2: Council Recommendation on blended learning approaches for high-quality and inclusive primary and secondary education
Action 3: European Digital Education Content Framework
Action 4: Connectivity and digital equipment for education and training
Action 5: Digital transformation plans for education and training institutions
Action 6: Ethical guidelines on the use of AI and data in teaching and learning for educators

Priority 2: Enhancing digital skills and competences for the digital transformation
What will the European Commission do to achieve this?

Action 7: Common guidelines for teachers and educators to foster digital literacy and tackle disinformation through education and training
Action 8: Updating the European Digital Competence Framework to include AI and data-related skills
Action 9: European Digital Skills Certificate (EDSC)
Action 10: Council recommendation on improving the provision of digital skills in education and training
Action 11: Cross-national collection of data and an EU-level target on student digital skills
Action 12: Digital Opportunity Traineeships
Action 13: Women’s participation in STEM
European Digital Education Hub

The European Digital Education Hub
To support both priority areas, the Commission will also establish a European Digital Education Hub strengthening cooperation and exchange in digital education at the EU level.
Why is action needed?
Digital transformation has changed society and the economy with an ever deepening impact on everyday life, and demonstrated the need for higher levels of digital capacity of education and training systems and institutions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has further accelerated the existing trend towards online and hybrid learning. It uncovered new and innovative ways for students and educators to organise their teaching and learning activities and to interact in a more personal and flexible manner online. In parallel, the uptake of digital technologies for education revealed challenges and inequalities between those who have access to digital technologies and those who do not (including individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds); and challenges related to the digital capacities of education and training institutions, teacher training and overall levels of digital skills and competences.
These changes called for a strong and coordinated effort at the EU level to support education and training systems to address the challenges identified and exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, while putting forward a long-term vision for the way ahead for European digital education.
The figures also speak for themselves:

a 2018 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) study found that on average less than 40% of educators across the EU felt ready to use digital technologies in teaching, with divergences between EU Member States
more than one third of 13-14 year olds who participated in the International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS) in 2018 did not possess the most basic proficiency level in digital skills
a quarter of low-income households have no access to computers and broadband, with divergences across the EU affected by household income (Eurostat, 2019)
95% of the respondents of the Open Public Consultation of the Digital Education Action Plan consider that the COVID-19 pandemic marks a turning point for how technology is used in education and training (Digital Education Action Plan, Open Public Consultation, 2020)

First Digital Education Action Plan
The Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027) builds on the first Digital Education Action Plan (2018-2020).
Get in touch
The Digital Education Action Plan is coordinated by the Directorate-General for Education, Youth, Sport and Culture’s (DG EAC) Digital Education unit.
To find out more about the Digital Education Action Plan, get in touch with us by email at
EAC-DIGITALEDUCATION@ec.europa.eu.







              Related links
            









                                                    EUDigitalEducation on Twitter
                                            










                                                    Public consultation on the Digital Education Action Plan (2021-2027)
                                            










                                                    European Education Area explained
                                            












  Policy documents




























































Want to give your feedback about this page?









Close this messageInformation messagePlease don’t ask questions or put personal details in this form.
If you need to ask a question, please contact Europe direct.




1. Did you find this page useful?
 (mandatory)  Please choose option




Yes


No





What was useful about it?
- Please select one option -Information easily accessibleInformation valuableAccurate contentVisually appealingEasy navigationUser friendly


What was the main issue?
- Please select one option -Information on the page is not clear, incomplete or inaccurateTranslation problemCannot find the information I needBroken link(s)The page does not display wellOther technical issueThe page or part of it is inaccessibleOther


Please explain your choice.





Please explain your choice.







2. Is there an issue with this page?
 (mandatory)  Please choose option




Yes


No





What type of problem?
- Please select one option -Information on the page is not clear, incomplete or inaccurateTranslation problemCannot find the information I needBroken link(s)The page does not display wellOther technical issueThe page or part of it is not accessibleOther


Please describe the problem in the box below






3. Help us improve further

Please tell us more about the context.










Thanks for your feedback
We are happy to see that your experience was positive.
Don't forget to share the pages you like with your friends and colleagues.

If you need to ask a question, please contact Europe direct.







Please reply to all mandatory questions


EAC Footer


Main sections



European Education area



Focus topics



Education levels



Funding




Popular topics



SELFIE tools for schools and educators



Study in Europe



European Credit Transfer



Digital Education Action Plan



Strategic Framework




Join EEA communities



European School Education Platform



EPALE



European VET practitioners



Erasmus Mundus Association



European Digital Education Hub




Social media



EU Digital Education twitter



Erasmus+ twitter



Erasmus+ Facebook











European Education Area
This site is managed by the European Commission, Directorate-General for Education, Youth, Sport and Culture


Accessibility statement








 About us 


About the department and how to contact us









European Commission





Contact the European Commission
Follow the European Commission on social media
Resources for partners






Languages on our websites
Cookies
Privacy policy
Legal notice





























































































