BRIEFING    Requested by the AIDA committee  F  Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies   Directorate -General for Internal Policies   Author s: Devin DIRAN, Anne Fleur VAN VEENSTRA, Tjerk TIMAN,   Paola TESTA and Maria KIROVA     PE 662.937 - July 2021   EN Artificial Intelligence  in smart cities and  urban mobility   How can A rtificial Intelligence  applications be used  in urban mobility and smart cities and how can  their deployment be facilitated     Context  and scope    The briefing analyses beneficial AI applications for smart cities and urban mobility, focusing on relevant use  cases and challenges faced by the public sector when it comes to the uptake and deployment of such AI  solutions. The briefing aims at providing v aluable information to the AIDA special Committee, in order to  enrich ongoing discussions concerning the difficulties faced by municipalities to deploy fundamental KEY FINDINGS   Artificial Intelligence (AI)  enabling smart urban solutions brings multiple benefits , including more  efficient  energy, water and waste management,  reduced pollution, noise and traffic congestions . Local  authorities face relevant challenges undermining  the digital  transformation  from the technological ,  social and regulatory standpoint , namely (i) technology and data availability and reliability, the  dependency on third private parties and the lack of skills; (ii) ethical challenges for the unbiased use of  AI; and (iii) the difficulty of regulating interdependent infrastructures and data, respectively. To  overcome the identified challenges, the following actions are recommended:   • EU-wide support for infrastructure and governance on digitalisation, including high  performance computing, integrated circuits, CPUs and GPU’s, 5G, cloud services, Urban Data   Platforms, enhancing efficiency and ensuring at the same time unbiased data collection.   • Inclu sion of  urban AI in EU research programs addressing data exchange, communicati on  networks and policy on mobility and energy, enhancing capacity building initiativ es, also  through test and experimentation facilities .  • Harmonis ing AI related policies in the EU, taking into account the context specificity: necessary  research .  • Adoption of innovative procurement procedures , entailing requirements for technical and  ethically responsible AI . 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.937 2 infrastructure enabling data analytics and AI solutions for the benefit of smart cities and  urban mobility .   The role of AI targets EU -wide urban challenges linked to accessibility,  sustainability , mobility, quality of life  and the management of public spaces. Among others, energy and water infrastructure need to make the  low- carbon transition, while improving service quality . Regarding mobility , cities face congestion and  emissions  issues , requiring  alternative , feasible, more efficient and sustainable solutions, and the grow th of  the related data economy.   To do so, the briefing relies on exist ing available data, studies and analysis from various sources, includi ng,  but not limited to, the latest official EU communications. Based on the above mentioned issues and sourc es  of information, the briefing will cover the following questions:   • How can A I support new smart applications in smart cities, such as management of energy and  water supply at district level, solutions for new services for inhabitants and businesses?   • How can AI be used  to improve urban mobility (reducing traffic congestion and air pollution,  increasing safety and inter -modality)?   • What type of hurdles do municipalities need to overcome to facilitate the deployment of these  technologies?   Introduction  – Artificial Intelligence applications in smart cities and urban mobility    Where smart city activities and technologies have commonly been about producing data and gaining new  knowledge on the complexity and dynamics of a city, AI takes cities to the next step of utilising the data an d  knowledge to support decision -making. The concept of urban AI can be defined as:  “Artifacts operating in  cities, which are capable of acquiring and making sense of information on the surrounding urban environment,   eventually using the acquired knowledge to act rationally according to pre -defined goals, in  complex urban  situations when some information might be missing or incomplete ”1. By 2025,  AI is expected to enable over  30% of smart city applications, among which urban mobility solutions2, significantly contributing to  resilience, sustainability, social  welfare and vitality of urban life. AI applications in smart cities can be  categorised in the following seven dimensions1,3,4:  • AI for governance  e.g.: urban planning, tailored subsidy provision, dis aster prevention and  management.   • AI for living and liveability , safety, security and healthcare  e.g.: smart policing , per s o n a lis ed  healthcare, noise and nuisance manageme nt and improved cyber security.   • AI for education and citizen participation  e.g.: locally accurate, validated and actionabl e  knowledge supporting decision -making.   • AI for economy  e.g.: resource (cost and time) efficiency and improved competitiveness through,  sharing services, efficient supply  chains and customer tailored solutions.    • AI for mobility and logistics  e.g.: autonomous and sustainable mobility, smart routing and parking  assistance, supply chain re siliency and traffic management.   • AI for infrastructure  e.g.: optimised infrastructure de ployment, use and maintenance, including  waste and water management, transportation, en ergy grids, and urban lighting.   • AI for the environment  e.g.: biodiversity preservation, urban farming and air quality management.  
Artificial Intelligence in smart cities and urban mobility      3 PE 662.937  Artificial Intelligence for smart citi es   Among others, AI applications can improve and innovate water and energy infrastructures, urban servi c es  and promote empowered and resilient communities in smart cities. However, local governments, citizens  and other smart city stakeholders face several  challenges when it comes to the implementation of those  applications.   AI for future proof infrastructure   Cities face great challenges to realise the acceleration of the energy transition, such as limited space  availability, scarce labour capacity and mat erials and limited financial resources. To achieve the climate  goals5 and accelerate the energy transition mass renovation and construction works  will be inevitable6.  AI enables local governments, construction companies, utility companies and other stakeholders to tackle  these challenges. For instance, AI for spatial object recognition based on satellite imagery, in combination  with machine learning for route optimi sation, can optimis e infrastructure planning in the limited space, and  support in prio ritising work and aligning that with the limited labour and materials. Achieving the climate  goals also entails that cities need to utili se all availabl e  local sources of sustainable energy, creating local  energy systems with decentral renewable energy  sources, impacting the grid with their intermittent  character. As an example, innovative 5th generation  district heating and cooling grids aim to integrate heat  and electricity as energy carriers towards climate neutral heat and electricity provision in the b uilt  environment. In addition,  these grids integrate the  urban water networks as a potential source of low  temperature heat, creating integrated multi -commodity grids  in our cities. To support distribution system  operators and energy providers, AI applicat ion can aid in understanding the intertwined energy grids and  support in the cost efficient control of these grids. This calls for the integration in smart grids  with a major  role for integrated AI applications which can be the linking pin between previous ly isolated infrastructure  systems in terms of planning and operation, and fill the gap of lacking monitoring and control of energy  grids on the local level. On an AI enabled smart grid, functionalities include the prediction of renewable  energy generation  from intermittent sources such as the sun and wind, and other decentral sources suc h as  geothermal and aqua -thermal energy for improved capacity utilis ation and grid control.   On the consumer side, machine learning can be utili sed to predict and disaggrega te energy demand for  improved energy efficiency , while AI driven control of consumer energy use additionally enables demand  side management  for grid flexibility. Together these applications make the grid more resilient for decentral  and uncertain generatio n, enabling the uptake of more renewable energy, while citizens are supported in  adopting flexible and efficient energy consumption patterns which benefits the households and the gri d. Examples are Netherlands based Quby, part of Eneco, developing these services for utility companies in the  Netherlands, Belgium and Spain, and Germany based Tado 7.   Smart infrastructure and asset maintenance  combines computer vision and automated Unmanned Aerial  Vehicles (UAV or drones) for e.g. distributed energy generation assets (urban wind turbines which may be installed in hazardous locations such as on towers and bridges, integrated p hotovoltaics (PV) in dwelling  facades), water treatment facilities, roads, tunnels and bridges. AI application contributes in damage detect ion, damage prediction, damage classification, damage localisation, condition assessment and life time prediction 3. This requires accurate and real -time data on the state of the assets, the utili sation of these  assets, and on the environmental factors impacting these assets8. Due to the lower risks and costs of smart  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.937 4 monitoring, these activities can increase in frequency, resulting in richer and more r eal-time asset data  relative to manual monitoring, resulting in perpetual improvement of maintenance. While city’s energy  networks will face major changes in the coming years, water networks require adequate attention too. A total of 3.5 million kilometres  in water pipelines in Europe, where often significant parts require drastic  renewal, may pose significant challenges to utility companies and risks for the sustainable supply of save  drinking water, and waste water management. These interventions will req uire up to 20 billion euros  annually, while challenges such as draught and increased water demand call for the implementation of  measures boosting the water grid’s efficiency and sustainability 9. AI applications may have a role in tackli ng  these challenges , for instance, in the detection and prevention of leakage along the line of predictive  maintenance in smart water networks. Rome’s water grid experiences about 44% leakage annually, which is  unacceptable in the light of increasing water demand, and draugh ts resulting in the rationing of water i n  the summer of 201810. Other applications of AI are for improved catchment area management on e.g. water  quality and the prevention of flooding and contamination, water efficiency on the demand side, draught  forecast ing and planning, and adequate sanitation11. Leading examples of AI applications in smart water  management are found in Finland12, the UK13 and the Netherlands14.  AI for innovative and smart services   Smart cities utilise innovative technology to support and transform conventional networks and services15.  In this section we address two examples of smart services which can be improved by AI, namely smart urban  lighting and smart waste management. EU cities are equipped with a total of up to 90 million street lig hts,  accounting for 20 to 50% of a city’s energy bill. Around 75% of these streetlights are older than 25 years and  call for innovation. In addition to these street lights, cities contain several other types of lighting in publ i c  spaces such as parks and b eaches. Smart urban lighting  has often deemed the solution to start the smart  city evolution of a city. By combining improved and efficient public lighting via remote monitoring and  control, lampposts are an ideal object to equip with IoT  devices which can  collect, communicate and locally analyse  data on traffic and pedestrian flows, environmental factors  such as air quality, temperature, wind speed and humidity,  and acoustic data for instance for gunshot detection, urban  noise etc. To this end, the Humble Lamppost EC initiative is  supporting cities towards 10 million smart streetlamps by  202516. Innovative applications can be found in major cities  such as Barcelona, Rotterdam, Munich and Copenhagen. In Barcelona, smart lighting infrastructure is utilised to monitor  occupation of beaches and public areas for crowd management. It is utilised to contribute in the COVID -19  crisis by offering citizens insights on where they can enjoy these areas while respecting COVID -19 social  distancing measures. AI is deployed to scan and analyse images of the beach on available areas instead of  counting people in order to cope with privacy considerations 13.   Second example of innovative public services in a smart city is smart waste management  entailing waste  collection and pro cessing. By adding sensors to waste containers which measure filling rate and  irregularities in its operation, efficiency gains can be realised via smart routing of collection according to the  filling rate, but also less nuisance for citizens caused by ful l containers or defective containers. AI can be  applied to predict the patterns of how, when, and where waste is discarded, opening up possibilities for  urban policy to stimulate efficient waste production and discarding among citizens. As part of the  RUGG EDIZED smart city project this innovation was implemented in the city of Rotterdam17. Further  efficiency gains are possible when AI enabled autonomous vehicles are utilised for waste collection. In  addition, AI can be utilised to optimise sustainable urban waste processing. In situations where the  
Artificial Intelligence in smart cities and urban mobility      5 PE 662.937  separation of waste is not yet widely common in a city, computer vision can be utilised to separate waste  flows for re - or upcycling towards a circular economy. These innovative public services are commonly  connect ed and can be unified via urban data platforms (UDP), a trend observed in many European cities i n  reaction to the platform economy coming up with major digital platforms such as Uber, Airbnb, Google etc . and the acknowledgement that city solutions are only  possible with trusted and efficient data and  infrastructure collaboration. In these UDPs, the data collected in the city comes together 18. A 2019 study  among 80 European cities derives that 32 cities have an operational UDP, while the other cities are in t he  phase of exploring the establishment of a UDP or planning and implementing a UDP. The majority of these cities and experts consider a UDP as critical infrastructure in a smart city along the likes of energy grids, roads  etc. 19. These UDPs can provide the data and the platform to create AI for improved or new value addi ng  public services. Moreover, increasingly smart city data is being opened up to other actors to benefit from via  new and improved business models20.   Towards autonomous cities1 presents the ultimate form of AI taking the shape of the City’s Brain as a central  point of control. The City  Brain AI makes the shift from specialised AI, e.g. f or energy infrastruc ture  maintenance, towards general AI applicable in multiple domains such as urban planning, health, safety &  security and governance in an integrated and autonomous city. However, these are domains where human  involvement is critical in  making decisions between what is good and bad, sustainable and unsustainabl e,  in short, ethical or unethical. Autonomous AI in the City Brain is subject to academic research and being developed by large enterprises such as Alibaba. However, local governments should be made aware of the  risks of these applications, and to what extent it contradicts the EU’s vision of human centric, ethical and  secure AI. This is crucial in scenarios where enterprises are in the lead in implementing smart city solutions,  and  the local government has to guarantee public values as a client.   AI for resilient and empowered communities   After addressing AI applications to improve the infrastructure in cities and to improve services towards  citizens, this section entails AI applica tions to enable and support resilient and empowered citizens in the  city. Citizen Energy Communities (CEC) are introduced in the Clean Energy Package (CEP) and play an  important role in the Green Deal as a new market party  to engage and empower citizens and amplify the  local enthusiasm and resources towards local, sustainable and reliable energy systems21. However, as the  energy system is getting more complex and technically challenging due to decentrali sation and  diversification, there is a role for open data and AI, as they may enable CECs to adequately deploy and operate local energy systems independently or in collaboration with new market parties such as  aggregators. From a citizen -science perspective, local initiatives take a more bottom up approach ( thus  control) over energy systems 22,23. However, they often face the challenge of upscaling and  professionalisation23. The role of digitisation and AI  in such processes could be multiple: from aiding citizens  initiatives with asset management and community platform building, to the development of alternative  pricing and business models for local energy exchange.   In addition to a reliable and sustainab le energy supply, a resilient society benefits from local, sustainable  and reliable food supply. To this end, urban communities are engaged in activities such as urban farming ,  often in combination with vertical farming. Like the local energy  system, these  local farming and agriculture systems are immensel y  complex and may be time and labour intensive in tight spaces and  connected sub -spaces. To sustainably maximi se the yield from urban  farming, e.g. by being energy and water efficient, and to minimis e the  hassle for citizens, AI can play a major role. AI application relates to automation in crop monitoring and care, based on imagery and other environmental sensors 24. As leading examples, California based start 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.937 6 up Plenty developed an AI and robotics run verti cal farm in the city, resulting in a 99% reduction in land -use  and 95% in water use25, while in Amsterdam vertical farming company GROWx, together with Wageningen  University, Signify and Be -bots build a robotic and AI driven vertical farm which automates th e cu lt iv ation   of crops26.   Artificial Intelligence for efficient urban mobility   Smart mobility solutions aim at increasing safety and efficiency, reducing traffic congestion, improve air and  noise pollution and reduce costs. Smart solutions for mobility are also recognised as essential to further  decarbonise the transport sector and reach the ambitious EU emission reduction goals. AI is a powerful  emerging tool that boasts  the potential to drive a sustainable transition to a more resource -efficient, livea ble  and human- centric mobility systems, especially in urban contexts.   The COVID -19 crisis has forced  the society to realise that it is possible to drastically change mobility habi ts,  especially in cities. The pandemic has indeed accelerated many existing trends, including home working;  increased use of individual transport modes; and greater general awar eness and concerns about heal th,  safety, and environmental sustainability. Thanks to this acceleration, the next few years represent a unique  window of opportunity for radical change toward more sustainable, resilient, and human- centric mobility  systems27. In order to fully unlash the benefits enhanced by AI, a holistic approach  to p ublic urban  mobility planning and management needs to be adopted . In particular, both transit mobility patterns  and local urban function information should b e considered, enablin g decision -makers to make informed  decisions on sustainable urban development and transit management28. AI applied to urban mobility can  rely on data produced by existing infrastructures (e.g. traffic controller detection, urban centrals, video data,  etc.),  fleet data (car probe data, eBike fleets, public transports) and also third (public and private) party data.  Public sector plays a crucial role to ensure the AI solution to be inclusive and secure, counting on reliable,  non- biased, fairly shared data, sti ll preserving EU citizens’ privacy. Specifically, according to tech companies  providing AI mobility solutions such as Nokia, there is a need for “ neutral city network to serve as a digital  backbone for the smart cities, together with  neutrally hosted data platform for creating  those new digital applications ”29.   The next -generation mobility is expected to  transform automotive original equipment manufacturer (OEM) , mobility services  companies, and cities; furthermore, such a transition, to be successful, requ ires the  mentioned actors to collaborate, engagi ng also financial services, insurance companies, telecommunication and utility companies  to achieve the common goal of a new  sustainable mobility. The shift toward AI enabled smart mobility will impact all th e  value chains involved, that will abandon  their linear and hierarchical traditional  structure for a network -like one, as shown in  the figure  above . Extant literature  highlights  how increased public spending on urban mass transit means and growing incenti ves  to entrepreneurial activities offering ride -Smart mobility networked value chain     Source:  Evangelos S.. Transportation Transformation: How  Autonomous Mobility Will Fuel New Value Chains (2020).   
Artificial Intelligence in smart cities and urban mobility      7 PE 662.937  sharing and autonomous vehicles must be complemented with data and AI -related skill development.  Smart mobility solutio ns can be implemented by private or public players, with direct and indirect  implications for both.   Private initiatives for smart urban mobility   Companies offering self -service electric cars   provide users with an application allowing to  book a car in self -service, choosing the  duration of the rental. Typically, these  operators own charging and parking faciliti es  over the territory covered by the service. The  self-service rental is often combi ned with a  carpooling option, highlighting the collaborative nature of the service. Several companies take advantage of this service as  alternative to owning a fleet of cars for the employees. Typically, the user is informed  about the amount of CO 2 saved, in cr ea s ing  awareness on the environmental topic . Therefore, this AI -based smart mobility  application boasts social (collaborati ve,  economic - new vehicle ownership model -  and ecological -  electric cars only) benefits.  Clem’ 30, a French company active in mo re  than 200 cities in France and abroad is an example of an operator offering this service.  The company also has two demo -centres, in  Philadelphia (USA) and Hangzhou (China). The former centre encompasses 13 ,000  employees and offers complementary  mobility services, encouraging the transi ti on  toward electric engines in the Navy Yard urban area. The latter collaborates with the IDF (Ile de France) region and the Hangzhou government aiming at becoming a symbol and virtuous examples of smart city.   Another rel evant application is short distance carpooling , which relies on AI to bridge the gap between  car travel and public transport, allowing for precision pricing and precision routing. This application is  addressed to people commuting from and towards the same areas. Here again , this service is a god  alternative for private companies car fleets. Klaxit 31,  a French company which acquired the iDVroom  platform, a former subsidiary of SNCF, is an  example. The mentioned platform optimi sed the  route of users sharing th e ride. However, some  shortcomings of this application concern the difficulty to predict if the driver will be punctual,  and the social compatibility of the co -passengers,  which can be intimidating for some people.   Smart parking management , thanks to AI,  improves car parks accessibility and fluidity. Mobility as a service (MaaS)   MaaS (tailored transport services offered via a unified  platform) is a good alternative to personal transport si nc e  mobility  on demand is synonym for freedom to go  anywhere anytime. MaaS offers multiple mobility options,  reducing congestion; enabling car -free cities and system level optimisation of mobility investments and assets; leading to better integration between goods and   passenger transport. MaaS with AI -based controllers can,  for instance, optimis e, monitor, and coordinate  autonomous car fleets, while offering great options to  individual users. AI -based MaaS enables ride -sharing users  to share autonomous cars across an o ptimi sed route in a  much cheaper and safe way, also offering greater social experience when riding with people of similar interests.   This can change traditional transportation networks and  transform the way people commute. MaaS can  significantly contribut e to the sustainability and human centricity goals. However, governance issues and  difficulties for private -led MaaS platforms in devising  sufficiently scalable and profitable business models are  hampering its diffusion. In the future, municipalities are  expected to play an increased role in framing and  enabling the development of virtuous MaaS solutions.   Sources:   adlittle.com , Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence (FCAI) .  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.937 8 Specifically, parking management  software allows to fully integrate a user’s  spaces into her/his overall mobility policy. Among other aspects, smart parki ng  management enables the management of  different type of access rights by  prioritising certain catego ries of users  according to, for instance, their functi on and means of travel. This application has a  significant positive ecological impact,  since it allows to anticipate a trip according  to the car park availability, avoidi ng  endless peregrination in sear ch  o f a  place.  This application is quite spread worldwide,  as testified by several companies such as  Passport (USA), EasyMile (France), Anagog  (Israel), Pod Point (UK), Cleverciti  (Germany), SnappCar (Netherlands), UnaBiz (Japan).   The three mentioned appl ications allow  for reduced urban traffic and  environmental impact of urban mobility.  Nevertheless, private vehicles are considered sub -optimal sustainable  solution for smart urban mobility, even if vehicles are electric, since the risk of traffic increase remains.  According to the Finnish Center for Artificial Intelligence (FCAI), 38% of people would be willing to give up their car, if thanks to AI, a similar mobility service can be offered. Given that 20% of household expenditure  goes to mobility, this ope ns up great business opportunities. This same money could be used to buy mobility  as a service at flat rate. The service should cover 100% of the users’ needs, which requires access to all  different modes of transport” 32.   Public initiatives for smart urban  mobility   Dubai  boast s a long list of smart mobility initiatives, including a bus on -demand service, in selected area  of the city, which success has been initially proved by a trial assessing response time, transit time, passengers  accessibility, affordability, convenience, safety, residents opinions and user experiences. Recently, the Roads and Transport Authority (RTA) of Dubai started a collaboration with the UK company BeemCar to devel op  the futuristic transport system called sky pod , defined as “a cross between a monorail and ski lift.” The  objective of the project is to meet the Dubai Self -Driving Transport Strategy, which aims at reaching 25% of  journeys in Dubai autonomous by 2030. Each sky pod is a four -seater suspended from a dr iveway unit that  rests inside a hollow, lightweight beam. Linear motors power the pod, making it travel at 50 km/h in a network placed above the traffic in a criss -cross manner, covering 15 km with 21 stations and with the  capacity to transport 8400 passen gers/h. The sky pod is expected to reduce transportation costs by 44% and  environmental pollution by 12%.   A study of UITP Asia -Pacific Centre for Transport Excellence on Artificial Intelligence in Mass Public  Transport , co-funded by Land Transport Authori ty of Singapore, surveyed the most trending AI -based  smart mobility applications, as shown in the figure above . The most important challenges experienced by Applications of current use of AI in public transport  (2020)     Source:  UITP (2020).   
Artificial Intelligence in smart cities and urban mobility      9 PE 662.937  the authorities involved in the deployment of the mentioned AI solutions  concern, among others, the lac k  of an appropriate legal and policy framework in public transport and the need of unbiased AI to avoi d  implicit discriminations. In both cases, collaboration represents a key enabler.   Among the excellences in smart mobility in the old continent, it is worth mentioning Reykjavik   for efficiency of its transport systems. Specifically, the app Strætó for a smart bus transport  network has registered more that 85 ,000 downloads since its creation in 2014. Copenhagen  aims   at becoming  a zero -carbon city by 2025 through an integrated system encompassing intelligent  bus priority system, fully electrified car sharing, building infrastructure enhancing commuting by  foot and by bike, including a network of 28 cycle superhighways. In additio n, Geneva boast s a  very efficient smart parking system, deployed through a network of sensors, lowering the number of vehicles searching for a place to park by 30%.   Deployment challenges for municipalities   Every change, even the most positive one, as it i s the case of smart cities and urban mobility, implies costs .  Those costs are not necessarily evenly and fairly distributed over those who enjoy the benefits of the change,  leading to conflicting interests  that need to be properly managed in order to achieve the envisaged  betterment for all. These costs can be associated to the switch in the technological paradigm, and to the  social acceptance of it.   The introduction of AI for smart solution in urban environments affects several established value chains, o n  top of the final users. In addition, as typically occur for emerging technologies and related fields of  applications, an additional category of challenges concerns the creation of an appropriate regulatory  framework .   Concerning the technological challenges, both AI -based applications for smart cities and urban mobili ty  suffer from lack of computing power, trust, limited knowledge, biased data collection processes, together  with privacy and security issues, especially at local level.   Concerning social ch allenges, it is often assumed that for rational or utility maximising consumers (or  stakeholders in general), new technology will eventually replace the old one.   On the contrary, human history and relevant literature shows innovation adoption is everything but smooth  and automatic, it indeed takes way more than an improved technology to ensure innovation uptake.   The main existing obstacles for the full deployment of smart cities and smart urban mobility solutions are  related to the lack of understanding o f the solutions proposed and, at times, the difficult access to those.   The new breed of AI -based solutions, “ despite their machine -orientation, needs to be a user -centred technology  that “understands” and “satisfies” the human user, the markets and the so ciety as a whole. Trust should be built,  and risks should be eliminated, for this transition to take off ” 33. Since the deployment of smart cities and smart  urban mobility systems rely on similar technology to be applied in the same environment, local autho rities   will face the same kind of challenges for both.   The following table provides a detailed overview of the challenges currently hampering urban smart  solutions.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies       PE 662.937 10 Challenge  category  Description   Technological  Increased responsibility for citizens in local initiatives resulting in increased the risks o f mistakes due to lacking skills o r due to inco rrect information .  Need of verification and validation of information, and stronger educational  programs34 and public ly initiated guidance of local energy grid initiatives.   Scope creep of AI35: once the system is in place and the investments made, novel exploration are often done in what else the AI -based system, infrastructure  or service can be used for. Such scope cre ep can lead to internal confusion on responsibility and accountability of the system.   Commercial pressure : increased dependency  on private parties as the developers and implementers of such services. As the algorithms they (co)develop, and  the data they collect, and the software and hardware they apply is often proprietary, this poses accountability and transpare ncy challenges for (local)  governments and smart city councils due to lacking information on the third parties involved.   Lack of  skills : on AI within local authorities, the implementation is often outsourced towards commercial parties providing tailored AI as a service. Howev er ,  digitali sation and AI related expertise is necessary for local governments to adequately assess internal ly or externally developed AI on their aspects o f  trustworthiness.   Technology and data availability, and digital sovereignty : the implementation and scaling up of AI applications in cities face the following challenges:   • Scarcity in technology, in compute r chips for instance,  can hamper the further roll -out and continuity of AI and IoT systems in smart cities. Local  governments have limited to no leverage in this global challenge, subsequently requiring in harmoni sed EU efforts to overcome this challen ge;   • City -wide AI applications increase the computational requirements, to the point that high performance computing is necessary (supe rcomputers).  Alternatively, edge AI decentrali ses computation at the asset level, taking away the need for supercomputers, ho wever , increasing the importance of  IoT infrastructure;   • Rise of the platform economy and dominance by Tech Giants (e.g. Nvidia), bringing interoperability and efficiency, but also d ependence on non -EU  companies;   • 93% of the AI adopters utili se cloud solutions36, and the EU market for cloud services is dominated by non -EU firms (Amazon, Microsoft, Google, IBM).   AI quality and reliability : missing or incomplete data, and subpar accuracy and availability of data. This impacts the quality and trust in urban AI systems.   Social  Ethical challenges in the utili sation of AI : The utili sation of AI for and with citizens, centrally positioning the public values, requires local government to  manage ethical challenges relating to conflicts of  interests and bias in decision -making, economic pressure (in platforms, procurement), inequalities, privacy  and data ownership and trust and transparency.   Regulatory  AI systems in cities will increasingly work in an open , dynam ic, hyperconnected environment , rather than a regulated environment, such as a factory. A  challenge  of AI application to integrate electricity, heat, water and mobility infrastructure relates to the increased impact of possib le adverse effects of AI , a s  opposed to separated infrastruct ure. 
Artificial Intelligence in smart cities and urban mobility      11 PE 662.937  Findings  and recommendations   Urban AI is part of a greater stream of digital transformation  of the intertwined physical, social and digital  realit ies.   For effective and trustworthy AI, in addition to  exemplary  AI European regulation and Digital Strategy, we  recommend to include urban AI in EU r esearch programs addressing data exchange, communication  networks and policy on mobility and energy , enhancing capacity building initiatives involving both  private and public (especially local) stakeholders.    On the operational side , the sharing of infrast ructure (sensors, hardware, software) and data is key for urban  AI business cases. Better inclusion of AI in research and policy frameworks pertaining to, among others,  European Data Spaces and Ecosystems, (inter) sectoral interoperability and h armoni sation, is expected to  facilitate urban AI implementation , also through the deployment of test and experimentation facilities as  part of the Digital Europe Program , support ing the EU in tackling the digital transformation .  AI demands regulation crossing the  borders of technologies and domains . At the time o f writing , no t  a ll  cities are equipped with the necessary expertise to guarantee public values in the digitali sation , leading to  either  non being involved as a local party, or not sufficiently being able t o manage and control AI soluti ons  implemented by commercial parties (e.g. large tech firms).  EU-wide support for infrastructure and  governance on digitali sation , e.g. Urban Data Platforms, is essential.   When it comes to new regulation, the ineliminable  trade-off between efficiency and equity is key. In thi s  respect, it is recommended to prioritis e efficiency , in order to accelerate the uptake of smart solutions i n  urban context .   This approach  is considered socially acceptable since also people  without  direct  access to AI solutions will  still benefit from those  thanks to positive externalities , including more efficient infrastructure s for energy ,  and waste management,  reduced pollution, noise and congestions . In parallel, equity must be (partially)  ensur ed by unbiased data collection.   Furthermore, innovative procurement  should become the norm, entailing requirements for technical  and  ethically responsible AI.   This holds for local governments taking the lead in AI implementation where procurement entails  technology supply, and for cities where enterprises are heavily involved in the provision of (AI -based) public  services.    
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies      Disclaimer and copyright . The opin ions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent  the official position of the European Parliament. Reproduction and translation for non- commercial purposes are authorised, provided the  source is ac knowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy. © European Union, 2021.   © Images used under licence from Adobe Stock .     IP/A /AIDA/ 2021- 03; Manuscript completed: July  2021; Date of publication: July  2021  Administrators responsible: Frédéric GOUARDÈRES, Matteo CIUCCI; Editorial assistants: Catherine NAAS, Janetta CUJKOVA   Contact: Poldep -Economy -Science@ep.europa.eu   This document is available on t he internet at: www.europarl.europa.eu/supporting -analyses     Print  ISBN 978- 92-846- 8396- 3 | doi:10.2861/ 648360 | QA -09-21-301- EN-C  PDF  ISBN 978- 92-846- 8395- 6 | doi:10.2861/ 365810 | QA-09-21-301- EN-N 1  Cugurullo, F. (2020). Urban artificial intelligence: From automation to autonomy in the smart city. Frontiers in Sustainable Cities, 2, 38.   2  See: Gartner. (2018) Three Rules When Using AI to Add Value to Your IoT Smart Cities    3  Luckey, D., Fritz, H., Legatiuk, D., Dragos, K., & Smarsly, K. (2020). Artificial intelligence techniques for smart city applications. International  Conference on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering, 3 –15.   4  Nishant, R., Kennedy, M., & Corbett, J. (2020). Artificial intelligence for sustainability: Challenges, opportunities, and a research agenda.  International Journal of Information Management, 53, 102104.   5  See: The Paris Agreement | UNFCCC   6  See: A renovation wave for Europe   7  See: Tado Smart Thermos tats   8  See: The Big Data Challenge – Insights by Onyx Insights into the Wind Turbine Industry -  Big Data Value (big -data -value.eu)   9  See: SmartWater4Europe - KWR (kwrwater.nl)   10  See: Data.Europa.EU (2018) Smart City at your Service – empowered by emerging technologies    11  See: Harnessing_Artificial_Intelligence_for_the_Earth_r eport_2018.pdf (weforum.org)   12  See: How AI is transforming the water management? — Silo AI   13  See: Thames Water | Smart Water For Europe (sw4eu.com)   14  See: Vitens | Smart Water For Europe (sw4eu.com)   15  See: European C ommission , Smart Cities and Communities   16  See: Humble Lamppost | Smart Cities Marketplace (europa.eu)   17  See: City of Rotterdam, Factsheet Smart Waste Management, (2019)   18  See: Smart City Swe den – A platform for smart sustainable city solutions   19  H. Sheombar, M. van Oosterhout, D. Diran, S. Bagheri, and C. Popp Larsen, “Governance, Trust and Smart City Business Models: the Path to  Maturity for Urban Data Platforms,” 2020.   20  See: gx-ps-public -private -partnerships -smart -cities -funding -finance.pdf (deloitte.com)   21  See: 2020 climate & energy package | Climate Action (europa.eu)   22  Huitema, G. B., Veen, A. van der, Georgiadou, V., Vavallo, M., & Garcia, M. A. (2020). Demand -Response Optimization in Buildings and Energy  Communities, a Case in Value Stacking. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute Proceedings, 65(1), 7.   23  Van Oost, E., Verhaegh, S., & Oudshoorn, N. (2009). From innovation community to community innovation: User -initiated innovation in wireles s   Leiden. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 34(2), 182 -205.   24  See: WEBINAR #1:  UAVs  AND SATELLITES FOR AGRICULTURE | BDVA   25  See: Pires, S. (2020). This 2- Acre Vertical Farm Is Managed by AI and Robots and Uses 99% Less Land   26  See: Amsterdam Institute for A dvanced Metropolitan Solutions. (2020). GROWx 2.0 Robotic vertical farm   27  See: arthur_d_little_prism_fum.pdf (adlittle.com)   28  Zhang, T., Duan, X., & Li, Y. ( 2021). Unveiling Transit Mobility Structure towards Sustainable Cities: An Integrated Graph Embedding Approach.  Sustainable Cities and Society, 103027.   29  See: Artificial intelligence – a key to sustainable smart cities and mobility — FCAI , 2021  30  See: Clem | Electric carsharing | Smartcharging (clem -e.com)   31  See: L’application de covoiturage du quotidien — Klaxit   32  See: Artificial intelligence – a key to sustainable smart cities and mobility — FCAI , 2021  33  Nikitas, A., Michalakopoulou, K., Njoya, E. T., & Karampatzakis, D. (2020). Artificial intelligence, transport and the smart city: Definitions and  dimensions of a new mobility era. Sustainability, 12(7), 2789.   34  See: Transforming the Grid: AI, Renewables, Storage, EVs, and Prosumers | Stanford Online   35  See: Koops, B. -J. (2021). The concept of function creep. Law, Innovation and Technology, 13(1), 29 –56  36  See: Deloitte (2020) Thriving in the era of pervasive AI: Deloitte's State of AI in the Enterprise                                                               
