BRIEFING       EPRS | European Parliamentary Research  Service   Author: Ionel Zamfir   Members' Research Service   PE 729.376 – April 2022    EN Multilateral initiatives for upholding  human rights in digital technologies   A task for the UN or for liberal democracies ?  SUMMARY   With their rapid advancement in recent times, d igital technologies have undeniably had major  positive and also negative impacts on human rights . They have  offered people better opportunities  to communicate and exchange information , thereby empower ing them to exercise their right to  freedom of expressio n and association, among others , and to draw public attention to human rights  violations . On the other hand, they have enabled disinformation, c yber -surveillance  and abusive  behaviour, such as hate speech, cyber -crime and  misuse of personal data .  There is a broad consensus that the same human rights and human rights obligations that apply  offline also ap ply in the digital environment . However, n ew technologies are creating a  fundamentally different paradigm  for human interaction,  and the current international human  rights framework has conceptual gaps . The main question for the international debate is how to fill  these gaps. Through  soft ethical standards or binding rules? What  is the best forum for this ? While  the UN is  best  placed , given its universal scope , it has been weakened by the action s of authoritarian  states . Multilateral coalitions of democratic states  are a n alternative avenue , but they bring a risk of  fragmentation of the global space for digital technologies.   When looking at how human rights play out in the digital context, it is important to carefully balance  the benefits and risks of new technologies, to apply a multi -stakeholder approach, and to bear in  mind that human rights obligations, while still incumbent on states as the main  duty bearers, also  apply to businesses, particularly those behind new technological developments.   The EU is involved in the discussions  on the above issues , both in the UN and in coalitions  of liberal  democracies . In parallel, the EU is working on developing guidance  and binding norms  on how  human rights obligations apply at EU and national level with respect to the digital environment.    IN THIS BRIEFING    Introduction    UN framework    Multilateral initiatives supported by democratic countries    European Union initiatives      
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service   2 Introduction   New digital technologies have had multiple societal impacts . They have significantly empowered  individuals to exercise their human rights , and helped expose mul tiple human rights violations . At  the same time , they have been abused as instruments  of control, surveillance and disinformation  by  governments and private entities alike . Their unequal uptake creates a deepening digital divide ,  particularly in the least developed countries , and  raises issues of discrimination.1 Other effects can  be more indirect and long  term but equally serious , one example being the impact  of artificial  intelligence (AI)  on the future of work, particularly in the form of job  losses and deepen ed  inequalities. A similar d ual tendency has been observed during the coronavirus pandemic : digital  technologies  have  allow ed many human activities to continue while limiting direct human  interaction, but at the same time , certain governments have applied abusive measures, restricting   freedom online , increasing surveillance  and misusing personal data . Violence against women and  girls perpetrated  with the help of information and communications technology has also be en  exacerbated  by the pandemic.   Human rights norms were drafted in the pre -digital age : the  three main pillars of the  international  human rights framework  were established between 1948 and 1976: the Universal Declaration of  Human Rights  was adopted in 1948, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights  entered into force on 3 January 1976, and t he International Covenant on Civil and Political  Rights  a few months later , on 23 March 1976. Of the seven other UN core human rights treaties , five  were adopted before 1991 and were therefore not designed to affirm human rights in a digital  environment. Of the two most recent ones adopted in 2006, the International Convention for the  Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance  and the Convention on the Rights of Persons  with Disabilities , only the latter includes some relevant provisions on promoting access for persons  with disabilities to new information and com munications technologies and systems, including the  internet.    The c urrent international human rights framework therefore has conceptual gaps , since  'new  technologies are creating a fundamentally different world that does not line -up exactly with our  traditional paradigms '.2 This raises the question of  whether existing treaties  should be amended or  just reinterpreted , or whether new specific ones should be adopted.  The main path pursued by  international forums has been of reaffirming and reinterpretin g existing norms in the digital realm,  when necessary . However, with the UN again becoming an ideological battleground  between  liberal democracies and authoritarian regimes that are pushing  for their own illiberal interpretation  of human rights, this task has become more complicated. L iberal democracies have therefore taken  up the task of promoting human rights in digital technologies in various formal or informal settings  (such as the Organ isation for Economic Co- operation and Development – OECD, the G7, and  the  Summit for Democracy) , in addition to their work done within the UN .    At the same time, it has become increasingly clear, particularly in the case of artificial intelligence ,  that a human rights perspective cannot  wait for new technologies to develop and then respond to  emerging challenges. T he design  of new technologies requires human rights to be considered from  the start. According to experts , democratic values  need to be taken into account in  the definition of  international technical  digital  standards  as well . Currently , there is no human rights compliance  requirement  tow ards international standardi sation processes , which provides fertile ground for  authoritarian influence . Hence, the need for democracies and for the international community to  carefully consider any new technological developments from a human rights perspective.  UN framework   The nee d for a multilateral approach within the UN   The challenges posed by new technologies are often transnational in nature. A multilateral  approach therefore appears, at least according to the UN bodies, as instrumental in help ing states 
Multilateral initiatives for upholding human rights in digital technologies   3 to keep up with the current rate of technological innovation and to avoid a race -to-the-bottom  'which permits technological harms to flourish in some jurisdictions while undermining  countermeasures in others' .3  Despite the obstacles posed by  political competition in side its ranks, t he UN is in principle  best  positioned  f or working towards a universal ly oriented  understanding of the way in which  international human rights norms apply to digital technologies , and for provid ing guidance  on the  matter. The UN is the custodian of international human rights treaties and has several UN Charter based bodies that deal with human rights. Through its specifi c mechanisms, such as the Universal  Periodic Review,  it aims to improve states ' accountab ility with regard to human rights  norms ,  including in the digital realm , although in practice political disagreements  among its members  often  hinder this mission . The UN, with its complex mesh of agencies and bodies, is also an appropr iate  organisation to facilitat e the kind of multi -stakeholder approach that is needed  to complement  multilateral cooperation on the matter .  The need to reconceptualise international human rights norms   According to various UN reports (as referenced in this section),  existing  international human rights   norms provide a sufficiently solid foundation  to deal with the cha llenges arising from digital  technologies , but need to be reinvigorated and (re)interpret ed.4 Establishing a  comprehensive  human rights framework for new technologies  should help overcome the current proliferation of  ethical principles and voluntary codes  of conduct covering only a limited range of human rights .  Proposal s by UN reports in this regard include:  creating  'a comprehensive manual or guide on how  human rights norms can be applied to new technologies, especially as embedded in governance  and business models '.5  So far, the interpretive work has been done through soft law instruments, such as declarations and  resolutions adopted under the auspices of UN forums  (see next section) , as well as through the  jurisprudence of the UN tre aty monitoring bodies . An example of  a comprehensive interpretive  attempt with respect to a UN human rights treaty is the General Comment  (25/2021) of the UN  Committee on the Rights of the Child on children's rights in relation to the digital environment. While UN treaties establish obligations for states, t he UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human  Rights  d o so for businesses  and can provide a solid foundation for guiding their action , also with  regard to new technologies.   The UN s ustainable development goals provide another framework for establishing links between   human rights and new digital technologies. A UN General Assembly 2018 resolution  recogni ses the  potential of information and communications technologies to foster sustained, inclusive and  equitable economic growth and sustainable developmen t, and the achieve ment of  the UN 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development . In this context, the 2018 resolution  underscores the  crucial  role of working towards bridging digital divides, including th at related to gender. 
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service   4 Relevant UN bodies ' resolutions   The UN General Assembly (UNGA) and the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) have adopted several  resolutions that deal with human rights and new technologies  from different angles, while the UN  Secretary -General and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as various rapporteurs  (e.g. the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and  expression , see also box above)  have drafted reports.   United Nations General Assembly   The silver thread in relevant UNGA resolutions6 is that ' the same rights that p eople have offline must  also be protected online '. Similar obligations  for duty bearers  apply in  the digital environment as in  the offline context. For example,7 UNGA resolutions on the right to privacy make  it clear  that  states  have a duty t o respect and protect the right to privacy in the context of digital communications ; to  put an end to violations of th is right and to create the conditions to prevent such violations ; and to  provide for access to effective remedies. Businesses should meet their responsibility to respect  human rights in accordance with the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights . Examples of UN reports that apply a human rights perspective to new technologies   Disinformation and freedom of opinion and expression : 'Disinformation is problematic, but so too are  the responses of States and companies. Laws and policies are often being made with sub -optimal  knowledge of online harm, without adequate data, research or public consultations. States have resorted  to disproportionate measures such as Internet shutdowns and vague and  overly broad laws to criminalize,  block, censor and chill online speech and shrink civic space '. (Report of the Special Rapporteur on the  promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, Irene Khan , April 2021)   Use of artificial intelligence (AI) on the enjoyment of the right to privacy and associated rights: a  Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  (September 2021) recommends inter  alia: ban ning  AI applications that cannot be operated in compliance with international human rights law ;  combat ting  discrimina tion linked to the use of AI systems by States and business enterprises ; and a dopt ing  legislative and regulatory frameworks that adequately prevent and mitigate the multifaceted adverse human rights impacts linked to the use of AI by the public and private  sectors .  Human rights defenders : Using the Internet, new technology and online  space  to promote  and  protect   human  rights , human rights defenders ' are finding important opportunities, but are also more and more  exposed to abuse and threats, including  with  regard  to their  families,  smears  and intimidation,  ridicule,  stigmatization  and defamation.  They  are also  subjected  to unlawful  surveillance, which  has led or often   leads  to other  human  rights  violations,  including  arbitrary detention '. (Report of the Special Rapporteur on  the situation of human rights defenders, Mary Lawlor , July 2020).   The role of new technologies for the reali sation of economic, social and cultural rights : a report by   the UN secretary -general  on The role of new technologies for the realization of economic, social and  cultural rights  ( March 2020) recommends inter alia: a ccelerat ing efforts  to bridge  digital  divides  and  technological  gaps between  and  within  countries ; invest ing in the right to social protection to both build  resilience to changes caused  by technological  innovation and  to protect  labour  rights in all forms of  employmen t; and a ddress ing discrimination  and bias in the development  and  use of new technologies,  particularly in terms of the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights .  Racial discrimination and emerging digital technologies: states must reject a ' colour -blind ' approach  to governance and regu lation  of emerging  digital  technologies ; states should address  the ' diversity  crisis '  in these technologies; states must prevent  and  mitigate  the risk of the racially discriminatory use  and  design of these technologies . (Report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial  discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance , June 2020).  
Multilateral initiatives for upholding human rights in digital technologies   5 UN Human Rights Council   The UN Human Rights Council  – the subsidiary body of the UNGA that deals specifically with human  rights at intergovernmental level  – has also adopted several relevant resolutions8 on the promotion,  protection and enjoyment of human rights on the i nterne t; on new and emerging technologies and  human rights ; on the right to privacy ; and on the right s of the child. It ha s affirmed the same  fundamental principle as the UNGA, namely , that the same rights that apply offline also apply online.   As early as  2012, in a r esolution on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on  the internet, the UNHRC  stated that 'the same rights that people have offline must also be protected  online; in particular, freedom of expression, which is applicable regardless of fro ntiers and through  any media of one 's choice' . In its r esolution 41/11 of 11 July 2019  on new and emerging digital  technologies and human rights , the UNHRC stressed  the potential  of these technologies  to facilitate  efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, but also the need to  bridge the digital divide and to be mindful of these technologies' complex  impacts. The resolution  on new and emerging digital technologies and human right s (47/23 of 13 July 2021 ) advocates for  a holistic, inclusive and comprehensive approach and the need for all stakeholders to collaborate .  UNESCO  initiative on artificial intelligence   Artificial intelligence system s pose a specific new class of risks for human rights . They are becoming  increasingly important in all aspects of the economy and society , but at the same time they can be  purposefully designed to infringe on human rights  or they can have unintended harmful  consequences on these .9 Given their high degree of autonomy, it is important that they be designed  in line with human values  from the very start . A set of ethical principles can prov ide useful guidance  for those working to develop such systems, and  also for regulators and decision -makers.   On 24 November 2021, the 192 member states of U NESCO 's General Conference adopted a  Recommendation  on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence  after a two- year drafting process that was  driven by independent and governmental experts and included consultations with multiple  stakeholders . The recommendation is the firs t global framework that sets itself the aim to guide  states in the use of artificial intelligence from an ethical perspective. S tates  are asked to ' give effect  within their jurisdictions to the principles and norms of the Recommendation ', but compliance is   voluntary. Businesses are not addressed by the recommendation, which can be  seen  as a limitation.   The recommendation contains a set of values and principles to be respected in AI systems. H uman  rights play a central role, but references to democracy are few ,10 the emphasis being instead on  'peaceful, just and interconnected societies '. This does not pr event the document from having a  strong focus on civil and political rights. The recommendation states that ' respect, protection and  promotion of human dignity and  rights as established by international law, including international  human rights law, is essential througho ut the life cycle of AI systems' (point 13). H uman rights and  fundamental freedoms should not be violated or abused w ithin interactions  with AI  (point 15) . The  obligation to respect human rights norms in the lifecycle of AI systems  rests wit h governments, the  private sector, civil society, international organi sations, technical communities and academia. New  technologies need to provide new means to advocate, defend and exercise human rights and not to infringe them  (point 16). P eace, inclusiv eness and justice, equity and interconnectedness should  be promoted throughout the lifecycle of AI systems . The principl es to be respected include  fairness  and non- discrimination,  and the  right to privacy .  The risk of political bias in the work of the UN  The work of the UN in this area also faces hurdles caused by the politically divergent agendas of its  member states.  
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service   6 Cybercrime treaty   An example of how divisive and potentially harmful new regulatory initiatives can be  is the  proposed convention on countering the use of information and communications technologies for  criminal purposes  (cybercrime treaty) put forward by Russ ia under the auspices of the United  Nations. Through resolution 74/247  of December 2019, the UNGA established an open -ended  ad hoc intergovernmental committee  of experts to elaborate an international convention on  cyber crime . The project proved very divisive from the start , as shown by the vote on the resolution:  it gathered only 79 votes in favour , to 60 against, with 30 abstentions. After several delays due to  the pandemic , the ad hoc committee held its first session  from 28 February to 11 March. It has to  meet at least six times to p roduce a draft. The draft treaty has raised serious concerns  that , should it  be adopted in this form,  it could undermine human rights  by criminalis ing free expression and  undermining  privacy . Civil society organisations  have asked that human rights considerations be  integrated at every drafting stage.   Political divisions pose risks to the mission of the UNHRC   The UNHRC has provided important clarification on the application of human rights norms to digital  contexts through its relevant resolutions, but its interpretive work is not without political  controversies . These may  undermine unanimity and lead to selective treatment of relevant issues.   Freedom of the internet : In its most recent resolution on the promotion, protection and enjoyment  of human rights on the i nternet , a dopted in July 2021, the UNHRC condemned internet shutdowns  and online censorship and any other measures that ' prevent or disrupt an individual' s ability to seek,  receive or impart information online ' as being in violation of international human rights law. It  encourage d states to take 'the necessary and appropriate measures to promote free, open  interoperable, reliable and secure access to the Internet'. This resolu tion further advocates internet  neutrality and  expresses support for the protect ion of  the confidentiality of digital communications   using  encryption. However, the adoption of this resolution could not secure unanimity in the  Council, with four countries a bstaining. China called for a vote  to block consensus  and abstained  (together with Cameroon, Eritrea  and  Venezuela ). A ccording to a human rights think -tank   monit oring the UNHRC, this type of behaviour  'may presage a coming ideological clash between  China and Western Stat es in this important  new area of human rights work'.   Freedom of expression : The UNHRC 's work on freedom of expression also faces politically  motivated limitations. A resolution on freedom of opinion and expression ( 44/12 of 24 July 2020 )  underlines that responses to disinformation  'must be grounded in international human rights law,  including the principles of lawfulness, legitimacy, necessity and proportionality' . According to a  European Parliament study , however, this resolution ' fails to address  the impact  of surveillance  technologies  which  cause  significant  chilling effect  on freedom of expression' . The study  explains  this with the increased influence that authoritarian states have had over the agendas of the UN  forums , using them as 'means of shielding themselves from criticism, promoting their own illiberal  projects', and  'reshaping international legal standards in ways that advance their interests' . This is  reminiscent of the Cold W ar era, when the UN was more of an  ideological battle ground for human  rights  issues than a body working to encourage respect for human rights.   UNESCO  artificial intelligence guidelines : Where are the AI superpowers?   The position of  the two leading powers  in artificial intelligence  – the United States  and China  – on  these guidelines is noteworthy. The United States ' position is absent , due to former President  Trump 's decision to pull his country out of UNESCO , a move that might be reversed  by the Biden  Administration . China  has expressed support for the guidelines , yet there are doubts about its  genuine commitment . One of the recommendations  (No 26) bans social scoring and mass  surveillance. Paradoxically, China, by agreeing to this system, seems  to back a ban on its own social  scoring (the 'social credit system ', which covers a broad range of areas – from finance to traffic  control  – but is fragmen ted and is not fully standardised) . At home, China has leveraged both its 
Multilateral initiatives for upholding human rights in digital technologies   7 authoritarian model  and its vast internal market  to secure itself AI leade rship . China  introduced  its  own set of eth ical guidelines governing AI  one month before  UNESCO  adopted its recommendation .  Whether it is truly committed to implement ing UNESCO  norms remains an open question. T his  situation illustrates the gap between international commitments and national practices , and raises  questions about the efficacy of international initiatives under UN auspices.   International internet standards and their importance for an open net   A proposal on internet standards – the 'New IP ' – presented by Huawei at the International  Telecommunication Union  (ITU , a UN a gency)  in 2019 revealed the importance of technical  standards for human rights and their potential for limiting human ri ghts. According to experts, this  proposal , which end ed up being rejected , entail ed a serious risk for basic freedoms on the internet ,  as one of its provisions – to assign a unique identifier to each user – would compromise users'  anonymity. G overnments wou ld therefore be able to perform surveillance on individual persons ,  and the internet would become an ideal tool  for social repression and control. China however  continues to push for other initiatives along this line, which would entail  a risk of fragment ing the  global internet. The ITU is headed  by a Chinese national , making commentators wonder  if China is  not interfering with UN officials' duty to a ct independently of national guidance.   China could also use its Belt and Road initiative , particularly its Digital Silk Road  component,  to  export  its own digital standards  and thereby undermine international norm -setting . It could also  assist other governments to better control  their internet, which c ould possibly lead to a split of the  worldwide web into a free and a closed internet.   Multilateral initiatives supported  by democratic countries   In various multilateral formats, democracies have taken up the task of ensuring  the integration of  human rights and democratic values in new technologies  and defending these values against the  potential harmful effect that these technologies  can have . This approach does not necessar ily  constitute an alternative  or a confrontational approach  to the UN- based multilateral work . It  reinforces the leadership  of democratic powers  and their capacity to counter authoritarian  influence , including in  global multilateral forums . The need for universal solutions  remains .  According to experts , for example , digital standard setting  must be global , and to  achieve this  universalism, democracies must not only c ooperate among themselves but also reach out to all like minded countries.   Furthermore, democracies face their own challenges not only  in ensuring respect for human rights  in new technologies, but also in fighting the erosion of democracy  driven by the increased (not  infrequently negative) impact of these technologies on the information al landscape, political  representation and labour markets . Multilateral cooperation initiatives provide a good opportunity  to exchange practices, learn from one another and find effective solutions.   OECD   Recognising the need ' to shape a stable policy environment at the international level to foster trust  in and adoption of AI in society ', on 22 May 2019, the OECD Council adopted a set of Principles on  Artificial Intelligence  in o rder to promote AI system s which are  human -centric . Some 40 countries   subscribed to  these principles  – 36 OECD member countries  (including all 22  countries that  are  members of both the EU and the OECD) , and six non- member countries  (including two EU  countries ).11 One of the five principles , 'Human -centred values and fairness ( Principle 1.2 )' states that   'AI actors should respect the rule of law, human rights and democratic values, throughout the AI  system lifecycle. These include freedom, dignity and autonomy, privacy  and data protection, non discrimination and equality, diversity, fairness, social justice, and internationally recognised labour rights'.  This principle acknowledges the importance of human intervention and oversight over AI  systems.  
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service   8 G7  The G7  – the forum  of the world's economically most powerful democracies  – has tackled  the need  for upholding human rights on the internet  as well . The G7 foreign and d evelopment ministers '  communiqué  pu blished on 5 May 2021 asked all countries to refrain from shutting down the  internet and mobile network services, 'thereby undermining the exercise of individual rights and  freedoms '. Also in 2021, G7 digital and technology ministers  published a declaration ask ing G7  member s to collabo rate with each other and with like -minded partners in  relevant for ums  to ensure  the development of digital  technical standards that support G7 members ' core  values.  In Annex 3  to  this declaration, the ministers committed to fostering human rights o nline  particularly with respect  to freedom of opinion and expression  (including the right to seek, receiv e or impart information), as  well as the  right to privacy.  In Annex 1 , G7 members committed to work ing with stakeholders to  develop and deploy internet  protocols that  sustain 'an open, interoperable, reliable, and secure  Internet, one that is unfragmented, supports freedom, innovation and trust, and empowers people '.  Council of Europe   The Council of Europe has been active in reaf firming the importance and applicability of human  rights on the internet and in the broader digital environment. Its Commissioner for Human Rights,  in a 2014 repor t on the application of the rule of law to the Internet and the wider digital world ,  stated that s tandards and principles that apply offline must also be upheld online.   The European Convention on Human Rights remains the fundamental instrument  for dealing with  new realities. The European Court of  Human Rights has already produced a rich body of  juris prudence  that deals with human rights in the digital environment, particularly the right to  privacy  and  personal data protection , but also with issues such as freedom of expression  and access  to information , and  state surveillance. While interpreting existing standards remains the main  approach for integrating the digital perspective in human rights norms, adoption or modernisation of new conventions is also an avenue followed by the organisation. The Council of Europe has  adopted  conventions on issues  with a strong link to the digital realm , such as  on  cybercrime  (2001)   and on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse  (2007).  It modernised  the 1981 Personal D ata Protection  Convention ( 2001 update ) to take into account the new realities.  In 2019, the Council of Europe created an Ad Hoc Committee on AI  (CAHAI), which is working  on a  framework, based on human rights and democratic standards , for the development, design and  application of artificial intelligence .  The Freedom Online Coalition (FOC)   The Freedom Online Coalition (FOC) , established in 2011,  is a multilateral and multi -stakeholder  initiative to support i nternet freedom and promote human rights online. It brings together  34 countries from all over the world (of which 16 EU countries ), which are committed to the principle  that people should enjoy human rights equally offline and online . According to the FOC's mission  statement, it aims to ensure that i nternet freedom issues are included i n international policy  through diplomatic coordination, but also to shap e global norms and promote multi -stakeholder  collaboration . At its 10th anniversary  in 2021 in Helsinki, the c oalition adopted a declaration entitled  Towards a Rules -based, Democratic and Digitally Inclusive World , in which human rights were a key  issue. In the document, the coalition declar ed that it opposed  'Internet shutdowns, network  disruptions and censorship that are inconsistent with  international human rights law', as well as  'online violations that shrink civic space, such as arbitrary or unlawful surveillance practices '.  The 2020 Summit for D emocracy  The Summit for Democracy, convened by the United States in December 2020 , included a strong  emphasis on digital asp ects in relation with democracy , and saw the launch of s everal initiatives : 
Multilateral initiatives for upholding human rights in digital technologies   9  Denmark, Norway, Australia  and the United States  launched an Export Controls and  Human Rights Initiative  wi th the aim to put in place export control policies 'to pr event  technologies from falling into hands that would misuse them '.    Canada, Denmark and the United States launched a Surveillance Principles  Initiative whose purpose is to outline 'how governments should use surveillance  technology in a manner consistent with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights  and the rule of law'.    the United States launched a new Multilateral Surge and Sustain Fund for AntiCensorship Technology  to support 'critical censorship circumvention technology  platforms, connecting more use rs to the uncensored internet and sustaining these  connections in times of greatest need '.  Another initiative suggested by the US shortly before  the Summit for Democracy – The Alliance for  the Future of the Internet  – was postponed  due to concerns  expressed by  civil society activists and  some government experts  that it would fail to fulfil its objectives . The Biden A dministration  resumed   its efforts to launch this a lliance in Janu ary 2022.   European Union initiatives   The EU has been at the forefront of efforts to develop a normative framework  for digital  technologies. Not long ago, t he Commission proposed  includ ing digital principles and rights in an  solem n interinstitutional declaration between the European Commission, the European Parliament  and the Council . The Commission published  its proposal  in January 2022,  calling it the Declaration  on European Digital Rights and Principles . Th is non -binding d eclaration would make a set of  recommendations to decision -makers and businesses about how to fulfil their human rights  obligations in respect to the digital environment. It  is supposed to  serve as a reference point in the  European context , but c ould  reinforce the EU's image as a model in this area  intern ationally .   The Trade and Technology Council  established between the US and the EU in 2020 aims to  coordinate policy on tech issues, including on pre venting transfers of technology when this  technology may be reused in ways that infringe on human rights or security . The EU also actively  supports multilateral initiatives in  the United Nations . According to the EU report on human rights  and democracy in the world 2020 , 'the EU c ontributed  to the development  of the UN Secretary General 's Roadmap  on Digital  Cooperation,  co-leading the work  of the Roundtable on Digital  Human Rights.  ... The EU also took part in consultations by the Human Rights Council Advisory  Committee ahead of the upcoming HRC report on digital and human rights. The EU also contributed to ad hoc consultations with the  UN Special  Procedures and  the Human  Rights  Council  advisory  bodies on a wide range of issues related to human rights and digital technologies '.  The EU has also taken concrete steps to reinforce its cooperation on digital issues with partners all  over the world. The  EU has set up the Global Gateway initiative  to strengthen connections between  Europe and the rest of the world and help partner countries tackle  the digital  divide and integrate   with the world. One of its objectives is to promote ' an open,  plural  and  secure  internet '. The Council  too has reaffirmed , with regard to the EU's global connectivity ambitions , the centrality  of human   rights  and the rules -based  international  order in the EU connectivity agenda .      
EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service   10 European Parliament 's position   The February 2022 resolution  on human rights and democracy in the world and the European Union's  policy on the matter  – annual report 2021 , calls on the Commission and the Council to strengthen the  EU's response and work towards the creation of international safeguards on disinformation, cyber attacks and other hybrid threats emanating from malign foreign actors seeking to undermine societal  resilience and democratic processes across t he EU, in our neighbourhood and beyond.   A report  by the Special Committee on Foreign Interference in all Democratic Processes in the European  Union, including d isinformation, adopted by the Plenary in  March 2022, puts an emphasis on  the need  for global, multilateral cooperation between like -minded countries in relevant international forums on  foreign interference and other destabilisation operations , with a view to establi shing international norms  and principles . It further ' calls for the EU and its Member States to initiate a process at UN level to adopt  a global convention to promote and defend democracy that establishes a common definition of foreign  interference '.    MAIN  REFERENCES   UN Secretary -General 's High- level Panel on Digital Cooperation , Report: Age of Digital Interdependence ,  2019.  Human Rights Council Advisory Committee, Study: New and emerging digital technologies and human  rights , 2021.  Council of Europe, A study of the implications of advanced digital technologies (including AI systems) for  the concept of responsibility within a human rights framework , Ra p porteur: Karen Yeung , 2019 .    
Multilateral initiatives for upholding human rights in digital technologies   11 ENDNOTES     1  UN bodies have been among the most active worldwide in monitoring the impact of new technologies on human  rights, see e.g. the 2020 Call for action on hum an rights of the UN Secretary General , the UN Secretary- General 's  Roadmap for Digital Cooperation , or the 2021 UNHRC Advisory Committee s tudy . This study highlights  two groups of  challenges that arise from new technologies:  1) unintended consequences  and  2) uneven empowerment.   2  See UNHRC Advisory Committee  study  on ' New and emerging digital  technologies and human rights', presented  during the  47th session of the Human Rights Council in July 2021.   3  See 2021 UNHRC Advisory Committee s tudy .  4  For example, the UN Secretary- General 's High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation report  of 2019 on the Age of Digital  Interdependence makes a call on 'the UN Secretary -General to institute an agencies -wide review of how existing  international human rights accords and standards apply to new and emerging digital technologies'.   5  See 2021 UNHRC Advisory Committee s tudy .  6  More specifically, UNGA resolutions  on the rights to privacy in the digital age 68/167 of 18 December 2013; 69/166 of  18 December 2014 ; 71/199 of 19 December 2016; and 73/179 of 17 December 2018; as well  as 73/218 of 20 December  2018 o n i nformation and communications technologies for  sustainable  developmen t.  7  See previous note.   8  Council resolutions 31/7 of 23 March 2016  on the rights of the child: information and communications technologies  and child sexual exploitation,  38/7 of 5 July 2018  on the promotion, protection and enjoyment of human rights on  the Internet,  37/2 of 22 March 2018 on the right to privacy in the digital age and  42/15 of 26 September 2019  on the  right to privacy in the digital age .   9  T he UN Human Rights Office published  a report  in September 2021 that 'analyses how A I – including profiling,  automated decision -making and other machine -learning technologies – affects people 's right to privacy and other  rights, including the rights to health, education, freedom of movement, freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and freedom of expression '.  10  e .g. Recommendation 29: efforts need to be made to increase transparency and explainability of AI systems, including  those with extra -territorial impact, throughout their life cycle to support democratic governance   11  Only Bulgaria, Croatia and Cyprus have not adhered.   DISCLAIMER AND COPYRIGHT   This document is prepared for, and addressed to, the Members and staff of the European Parliament as  background material to assist them in their parliamentary work. The content of the document is the s ole  responsibility of its author(s) and any opinions expressed herein should not be taken to represent an official  position of the Parliament.   Reproduction and translation for non -commercial purposes are authorised, provided the source is  acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy.   © European Union, 202 2.  Photo credits: © ipopba / Adobe Stock.   eprs@ep.europa.eu  (contact)   www.eprs.ep.parl.union.eu  (intranet)   www.europarl.europa.eu/thinktank  (internet)   http://epthinktank.eu  (blog)    
