1 CHARLEVOIX   COMMON VISION  FOR THE FUTURE   OF ARTIFICIAL   INTELLIGENCE
2CHARLEVOIX COMMON VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE   Artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to introduce new sources of economic growth, bring  significant benefits to our societies and help address some of our most pressing challenges including  safeguarding human rights, achieving gender equality, feeding a growing global population,  improving the health of our citizens, empowering the elderly and citizens with disabilities, increasing  participation in the workforce, countering harmful bias and supporting inclusive societies. Realizing  the broad potential of AI technologies will require thoughtful investments in entrepreneurship,  research, education and the labour market to respond to the associated societal impacts, to adapt to  changes in demand for skills, and to promote relevant skills and knowledge for the jobs of the future. AI that fosters economic growth, societal trust, gender equality and inclusion depends on a  predictable and stable policy environment that promotes innovation, as recognized by the 2018 G7  Montreal Ministerial Statement on Artificial Intelligence , and the multi-stakeholder, human-centric  vision outlined in the 2017 G7 ICT and Industry Ministers’ Torino Declaration . WE, THE LEADERS OF THE G7, COMMIT TO: 1. Endeavour to promote human-centric AI and commercial adoption of AI, and continue to  advance appropriate technical, ethical and technologically neutral approaches by: safeguarding  privacy including through the development of appropriate legal regimes; investing in  cybersecurity, the appropriate enforcement of applicable privacy legislation and communication  of enforcement decisions; informing individuals about existing national bodies of law, including  in relation to how their personal data may be used by AI systems; promoting research and  development by industry in safety, assurance, data quality, and data security; and exploring the  use of other transformative technologies to protect personal privacy and transparency. 2. Promote investment in research and development in AI that generates public trust in new  technologies, and encourage industry to invest in developing and deploying AI that supports  economic growth and women’s economic empowerment while addressing issues related to  accountability, assurance, liability, security, safety, gender and other biases and potential  misuse. 3. Support lifelong learning, education, training and reskilling, and exchange information on  workforce development for AI skills, including apprenticeships, computer science and STEM  (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education, especially for women, girls and  those at risk of being left behind.
34. Support and involve women, underrepresented populations and marginalized individuals  as creators, stakeholders, leaders and decision-makers at all stages of the development and  implementation of AI applications. 5. Facilitate multistakeholder dialogue on how to advance AI innovation to increase trust and  adoption and to inform future policy discussions. 6. Support efforts to promote trust in the development and adoption of AI systems with particular  attention to countering harmful stereotypes and fostering gender equality. Foster initiatives that  promote safety and transparency, and provide guidance on human intervention in AI decisionmaking processes. 7. Promote the use of AI applications by companies, in particular small and medium-sized  enterprises and companies from non-tech sectors. 8. Promote active labour market policies, workforce development and reskilling programs to  develop the skills needed for new jobs and for those at risk of being left out, including policies  specifically targeting the needs of women and underrepresented populations in order to increase  labour participation rates for those groups. 9. Encourage investment in AI technology and innovation to create new opportunities for all  people, especially to give greater support and options for unpaid caregivers, the majority of  whom today are women. 10. Encourage initiatives, including those led by industry, to improve digital security in AI and  developing technologies, such as the Internet of Things and cloud services, as well as through  the development of voluntary codes of conduct, standards or guidelines and the sharing of best  practices. 11. Ensure AI design and implementation respect and promote applicable frameworks for privacy  and personal data protection. 12. Support an open and fair market environment including the free flow of information, while  respecting applicable frameworks for privacy and data protection for AI innovation by addressing  discriminatory trade practices, such as forced technology transfer, unjustified data localization  requirements and source code disclosure, and recognizing the need for effective protection and  enforcement of intellectual property rights.
