Political campaigning  20180326   Version 3.1  4   Guidance on  political campaigning   ICO guidance   I
Political campaigning  20180328  Version 3.1   1 Guidance on political campaigning Data Protection Act Privacy and Electronic Communications  Regulations   Contents Introduction .............................................................................  2  Overview .................................................................................  4  Why comply? ...........................................................................  5  What is direct marketing? ..........................................................  6  Market research .................................................................... 7   Collecting personal information ..................................................  8  Privacy notices ...................................................................... 8   Consent to sen d direct marketing ............................................  9  Contact details collected as part of constituent casework ..........  10  Marketing by post ................................................................... 10  Marketing calls .......................................................................  12  Live marketing calls .............................................................  13  Automated marketing calls ...................................................  14  Marketing by electronic mail ....................................................  14  Viral marketing or ‘tell a friend’ campaigns  .............................  16  Marketing by fax .................................................................... 18  Objections to direct marketing from individuals ..........................  18  Marketing lists compiled by third parties .................................... 20  Using analytics .......................................................................  21  Data protection principles ........................................................  22  Elected representatives changing to a different political party ...... 23  More information .................................................................... 23  
Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  2 Introduction   This guidance has been updated to include ‘GDPR update’  boxes. These updates signpost key differences in the new  data protection regime that will affect political campaigning  from 25 May 2018 onwards, and link to new sources of  relevant GDPR guidance.  We will be updating this guidance in more detail in due  course.  For more information on the GDPR, see our Guide to the  GDPR. The transition period for leaving the EU ended on 31  December 2020. The GDPR has been retained in UK law as  the UK GDPR, and will continue to be read alongside the  Data Protection Act 2018, with technical amendments to  ensure it can function in UK law.  We will be updating this  guidance in more detail in due course. For more information  on the UK GDPR, see our Guide to the UK GDPR.
Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  3 5.This guidance explains what an organisation needs to do in each case, including where it uses viral marketing and ‘tell a friend ’ campaigns.1.Engaging voters is important in a healthy democracy, and in order to do that, political parties, referendum campaigners and candidates will campaign using a variety of communication methods. However, they must comply with the law when  doing so; this includes the handling of the personal data that they collect and hold. If they contact an individual by any of the methods listed in the overview  to promote a political view in order to gain support at the ballot box, or otherwise influence an individual, that is ‘direct marketing ’ and this is also regulated by law. 2.Throughout this guidance we use the term ‘political campaign ’ to mean activity in support of, or against, a political party, a referendum campaigner or a candidate standing for election. We use the term ‘organisations ’ to include individuals and organisations carrying out this activity. This includes candidates, employees and volunteers working for the political party or candidate. 3.Under the Privacy and Electronic Communication (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (PECR) and the Data Protection Act 1998 (the DPA) there are specific rules organisations must comply with for each type of communication method and for the processing of personal data. The Information Commissioner enforces compliance with both pieces of legislation. 4.An overview of the main provisions of the DPA can be found in The Guide to Data Protection,  and a n overview of the main provisions of PECR can be found in The Guide to Privacy and Electronic Communications . Detailed guidance on the direct marketing rules can be found in our direct marketing guidance . We have also produced a direct marketing checklist  to help   organisations comply with the law and good practice. 
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 4 Overview   Communication  method  In summary, organisations may use this  method to promote a political party,  candidate or referendum campaign…   Post addressed to  particular individuals  …unless the individual has asked the  organisation not to write to them or not to  send them marketing material by post. In  addition, electoral law1 will set out whether  a political party, candidate or referendum  campaigner has the right to send a Freepost  mailing. This specific right applies even if  the individual has asked the organisation  not to contact them.     Email/text and other  messages to mobile  phones/voicemail  …where the ind ividual has consented to  contact of that sort from the organisation  for those purposes.   Fax …where the individual has consented to  contact of that sort from the organisation  for those purposes.   Phone calls  …unless the organisation has grounds for  believing the individual would not want it to  contact them, such as TPS registration.   Automated phone  calls …where the individual has consented to  contact of that sort from the organisation  for those purposes.   AND in every case  ...the organisation must n ormally identify  itself in the communication and provide  contact details to allow individuals to  contact it and easily opt out of unwanted  direct marketing. Electoral law also requires                                       1 Section 91, Representation of the People Act 1983 for UK Parliament elections;  Regulation 63, European Parliamentary Election Regulations 2004; Regulation 58,  European Parliamentary Elections (Northern Ireland) Regulations 2004; Article       `61,  Scottis h Parliament (Elections etc) Order 2010; Article 65, Representation of the People  (National Assembly of Wales) Order 2007 and Schedule 1, Northern Ireland Assembly  (Elections) Order 2001 (applying section 91 of the RPA 1983). Further guidance is  available from the Electoral Commission website: http://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/    
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  5 specific details to appear on election  publications.   Why comply?   GDPR Update     The GDPR contains substantial fines for failing to comply with  its requirements, including  fines of up to €20 million, or 4% of  your total worldwide annual turnover, whichever is higher.     PECR penalties are likely to remain the same.       6. The actions of a political campaign come under close scrutiny  from the public and the media. It is not just in an  organisation’s interests to act lawfully , but it should also show  respect for the privacy of the individuals it seeks to represent,  by treating them fairly. Treating individuals fairly includes using  their information only in a way they would expect, while  respecting any preferences they have expressed about not  receiving direct marketing (subject to the right of a political  party, referendum campaigner or candidate to send a Freepost  mailing at a particular election or referendum).    7. In recent years we have investigated complaints about political  parties and referendum campaigners using direct marketing,  and on occasion we have used our enforcement powers to  prevent them doing the same thing again. Failure to comply  with an enforcement notice is a criminal offence. We can also  issue fines of up to £500,000 for a serious breach of the DPA or  PECR. We will consider the nature and number of any  complaints received about direct marketing by political parties  with a view to using the powers at our disposal to prevent  political campaigns from making the same mistake in future.    8. The complaints we have received reveal that individuals find  unwanted direct marketing, and unwanted contact from  political parties in particular, to be extremely annoying. This is  more likely to be the case where more intrusive means of  contact are used or the individual has previously objected to  marketing and where they are opposed to an organisation’s  views.   
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  6 9. It is important to understand where responsibility for complying  with the DPA and PECR lies; ie who is the ‘data controller ’. We  have produced guidance Data controllers and data processors:  what the difference is and what the governance implications  are. Political parties are set up in different ways so the data  controller might be central office, a local constituency office, a  candidate or a campaigner, or more than one of these. MPs are  data controllers in their own right, as are many other elected  representatives. Political parties must be clear whether the  central office or local office is the data controller. Regardless of  where legal responsibility lies, political parties should bear in  mind that the media and general public are likely to take the  view that the party is ultimately responsible.   What is direct marketing?   GDPR Update     The GDPR doesn’t define ‘direct marketing’. However the DP  Bill which is currently being debated contains a definition of  direct marketing which is very similar to the 1998 Ac t  definition – this is however subject to change until the Bill is  made into law.       10. Section 11 of the DPA defines direct marketing as:      “the communication (by whatever means) of any advertising  or marketing material which is directed to particular  individuals”.       11. Direct marketing is not limited to the offer for sale of goods or  services only, but also includes the promotion of the aims and  ideals of any organisation including political campaigns. This  would include appeals for funds or support for a campaign,  encouraging individuals to take some form of direct action or  vote for a particular political party or candidate.    12. This definition extends to any means of communication  including online marketing, social networking or other  emerging channels of communication. It also covers any  messages which include some marketing elements, even if this  is not their main purpose. 
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 7   13. Our view was supported by the Information Tribunal in Scottish  National Party v Information Commissioner (EA/2005/0021, 15  May 2006)  when it dismissed the argument  that political  campaigning was not marketing .     14. Political parties, candidat es and referendum campaigners need  to ensure that their activities comply with the law as they are  not exempt from either the DPA or PECR .    15. Because direct marketing covers communications ‘directed to  particular individuals ’, mailings addressed to individua ls by  name  will be caught by the definition in nearly all  circumstances  – whether delivered by the Royal Mail , private  delivery firms  or by local volunteers . However  leaflet -drops and  mailings which are unaddressed, or addressed merely to ‘the  occupier ’, do not fall within the statutory definition of direct  marketing.      16. Candidates, political parties and referendum campaigners have  a right (depending on the type of election or referendum2) to  send a n ‘election address ’ by Freepost , either addressed to   each individual elector or unaddressed to each postal address.   This applies to elections for the UK or Scottish Parliament, for  the Northern Ireland Assembly or National Assembly for Wales,  or for the European Parliament, or at a particular referendum .   This type of  Freepost mailing does not constitute direct  marketing.    17. For further detail on the direct marketing rules , read our direct  marketing guidance .   Market research   18. A political campaign can conduct genuine research in the same  way that professional market research companies do to help  inform their views and formulate policies. The direct marketing  rules do not apply to genuine market research as th is does not  involve communicating  advertising or promotional material.   19. However, communications claiming to be for research that are  in reality intended to gain support now or at some point in the                                       2These requirements are set out in the Electoral Commission’s guidance for each  election and referendum at  www.electoralcommission.org.uk .   
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 8 future are covered  by the direct marketing rules . For exampl e  the following are direct marketing:    a telephone call which starts by seeking an individual’s  opinions and then urges support or invites contact with a  political party, referendum campaigner or candidate or to  provide promotional materials on request; and    a telephone call which seeks an individual’s opinions in  order to use that data to identify those people likely to  support the political party or referendum campaign at a  future date in order to target them with marketing.   20. It should be possible for market research to be carried out  without recording the information in a way that identifies the  individual respondent. If an organisation r ecord s the responses  in a way that it can be linked to the individual so that it  can  then follow up their responses and contact them in future , it is  conducting marketing and will need to explain that to them  before collecting their information.   21. For further information on market research , read our direct  marketing  guidance.   Collecting personal  information   Privacy notices   GDPR Update     The GDPR requires that personal data are processed fairly and  in a transparent manner . Individuals have the rig ht to be  informed about the collection and use of their personal data.   You must provide individuals with privacy information  including: your purposes for processing their personal data,  your retention periods for that personal data, and who it will  be shared with.     See our guidance on the right to be informed  for further  details.       22. The DPA requires that processing of personal information must  be fair. Fairness generally requires an organisation to be  transparent and tell individuals how it intends to use their  personal data including who the information will be shared 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  9 with. This is commonly provided by a privacy notice given to  individuals at the time their data is collected.  23. Privacy notices should be written in clear straightforward  language that individuals will understand. Read our Privacy  Notices Code of Practice  for detailed information.  Consent to send direct marketing   GDPR Update     The definition of consent has been updated. Whilst the  key  elements of the conse nt definition remain (freely given,  specific, informed, and there must be an indication signifying  agreement), the GDPR is clearer that the indication must be  unambiguous and involve a clear af firmative action.     There are also s everal other new provisions on consent - for  example specific provisions on keeping records of consent,  clarity and prominence of consent requests, the right to  withdraw consent, and avoiding making consent a condition of  a contract.     See our GDPR consent guidance  for full details.       24. Organisations will generally need an individual’s consent before  sending:    marketing emails, texts or faxes;    making automated marketing calls; or    making marketing calls to a number registered on the  Telephone Preference Service.    25. In order for consent to be valid the individual must know what  they are consenting to , the consent should be freely given, and  clear and specific to the type of marketing being sent by the  particular organisation.  26. If candidates in internal party elections wish to use member  lists to send emails or texts, or make automated calls the  candidate must ensure that they have consent from the  individuals to use such marketing channels.  27. Read our direct marketing guidance  for further detailed  guidance on marketing consent. 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  10 Contact details collected as part of constituent casework  28. Elected representatives and their parties should not use contact  details they obtained when carrying out casework for direct  marketing unless they are sure that the constituents concerned  would expect that contact from them and would not object.  Specific consent is needed from the constituent in the case of  marketing emails, text messages or automated calls.  29. Compliance advice for elected representatives and their offices  on handling personal information when carrying out casework  on behalf of constituents is available from the sources listed  below.     Elected body  Contact point   European Parliament  European Data Protection Supervisor in  Brussels   House of Commons  Information Rights and Information  Security Service (IRIS)   National Assembly  for Wales  Information Governance Manager   Northern Ireland  Assembly  Communications and Information  Standards team   Scottish Parliament  Head of Information Governance   Local authorities  Members’ Services or equivalent   Marketing  by post   GDPR Update     If you are relying on consent to send marketing by post then  the individual has the right to withdraw their consent at any  time. It must be as easy to withdrawn consent as it was t o  give it.     See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.     The GDPR also gives individuals the right to object at any time  to processing of their personal data for t he purposes of direct 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  11 marketing. T he right to object to marketing is absolute and  you must stop processing for these purposes when someone  objects .     See our right to object  guidance for further details.     If you are buying or renting a ‘consented’ marketing list, the  consent req uest must have identified you specifically. Even  precisely defined categories will not be enough to give you  valid informed consent under the GDPR definition.     You must keep records to demonstrate what the individual has  consented to, including what they were told, and when and  how they consented .     See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.     If you buy personal data from another organisation, you must  provide people with your own transparency information  detailing anything that they haven’t already been told.     See our guidance on the right to be informed  for further  details.       30. If an organisation uses personal information to promote a  political campaign by sending them promotional messages by  post it will need to make sure that it processes their personal  information fairly and in most circumstances that it respects  any requests not to receive information from it.    31. Political parties, referendum campaigners and candidates are  entitled to a copy of the full electoral register for electoral or  referendum purposes, which includes contacting individuals on  the list by post. At particular elections or referendums  they also  have a specific legal right to send one Freepost mailing, as  described in paragraph 16.    32. Politica l parties, candidates, and those who campaign for or  work with them must treat the electoral register with great  care and ensure it is kept securely. Failure to do so may give  rise to a breach of the DPA.     33. The electoral register is regularly updated. The use of an older  version of the register may raise issues about processing  personal data, and lead to the risk of a breach of the provisions 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  12 of the DPA. Such processing might be unfair and might not  accord with the expectations of individuals.    34. Quite apart from this specific right, use of the full register  during elections or referendums is legitimate and an  organisation may contact an individual to promote a political  campaign unless it is aware that the individual objects to direct  marketing .     35. Where an organisation collects information directly from the  individual, it must clearly explain to them that it will be using  their information to target them with direct marketi ng by post,  unless it is otherwise apparent from its relationship with them  that this contact will occur.    36. Where an organisation sends promotional mailings  to known  supporters, it needs to be satisfied that those supporters would  expect their personal information to be used for that purpose.    37. Where an organisation buys or rents mailing lists from a third  party to contact individuals who meet a particular profile, it  needs to be sure that the personal information has been fairly  obtained only from individuals who would expect their  information to be used for promotional purposes by a particular  political campaign. If the organisation is employing a third  party to carry out a mailing, it must ensure that the third party  observes these requirements. The use of a third party in either  of these scenarios is likely to be the responsibility of the data  controller (see paragraph 9, above).    38. The organisation must identify itself in any campaign material  and include certain information specified by law.3 It is good  practice to provide contact details so that individuals who wish  to object to any further direct marketing can do so.    39. An organisation must not send mailings to anyone who has  objected, unless it is sending an election or referendum  Freepost mailing (see above). Read the section on individuals  objecting to direct marketing  for more information.  Marketing calls   GDPR Update                                        3 These requirements are set out in the Electoral Commission’s guidance for each  election and referendum at www.electoralcommission.org.uk . 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  13   If you are buying a ‘consented’ marketing list, the consent  request must have identified you specifically. Even precisely  defined categories will not be enough to give you valid  informed consent under the GDPR definition.     You must keep records to demonst rate what the individual has  consented to, including what they were told, and when and  how they consented .     See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.     If you buy personal data from another organisation, you must  provide people with your own transparency information  detailing anything that they haven’t already been told.     See our guidance on the right to be informed  for further  details.       40. The organisation must treat individuals fairly. If it is collecting  landline or mobile numbers from individuals in order to use  them for direct marketing, it will need to inform them that their  information will be used in that way. If it obtains numbers from  third parties, it will need to be sure that the individual has been  informed and has a reasonable expectation that their number  will be used for promotional calls by a third party for a political  campaign.  Live marketing calls  41. Organisations must ensure that they screen against the  Telephone Preference Service (TPS) when undertaking  telephone campaigns. The organisation must also ensure that it  does not call individuals who have told it that they do not want  to be called.    42. Live marketing calls can only be made to numbers registered  on the TPS where the individual has specifically agreed to the  organisation telephoning them.     43. In all other cases, it cannot make phone calls to anyone,  including an existing supporter, who has registered with the  TPS or who has objected to the organisation directly about the  use of their information for direct marketing purposes.    
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  14 44. Where the organisation is permitted to telephone an individual,  it must:   identify itself at the start of the call;   allow i ts number (or an alternative contact number) to be  displayed to the person receiving the call ;    if requested provide an address or number where it can be  reached free of charge to object to marketing; and    record and respect any objection to marketing made by the  individual at the time of the call.    45. Read our guidance on telephone marketing  for more  information .   Automated marketing calls  46. The rules on automated marketing calls are stricter than live  calls. This is when a recorded message is played to the person  who answers the phone. It is worth noting that many  individuals have told us that they consider automated calls to  be extremely intrusive and even disturbing.    47. If an organisation wishes to use automated calling it will need  the specific prior consent of the individual.     48. Obtaining consent to make live voice calls is not sufficient and  the automated nature of the calls must be clear in the  information given to individuals to inform their decision.     49. All automated marketing calls must include the name of the  organisation and a contact address or Freephone number, and  must allow the organisation’s number (or alternative contact  details) to be displayed to the person receiving the call.  Marketing by electronic mail   GDPR Update     The right to object to direct marketing under Article 21(3)  does not prevent a co ntroller from holding a suppression list,  as the list supports the individual’s right to object and is held  for compliance rather than for direct marketing purposes.   See our right to object  guidance for further details.       50. An organisation must carefully consider its compliance with the  DPA and PECR when communicating with individuals by 
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 15 electronic mail. ‘ Electronic mail’ includes email, text message,  social media, video message and voicemail .  51. The organisation must have the individual’s specific consent to  communicate with them in this way. In addition , in all such  communications the organisation must identify itself and  provide an address that individuals can use to object and  request that it does not send them any further  communications.   52. An organisation might have collected email addresses or mobile  phone numbers in connection with particular issues highlighted  in previous campaigns ; for example , school closures or road  building. As prior consent is required, the organisation must  assess the basis on which those contact details were collected  originally  if it wants to use them to promote subsequent  campaigns by electronic mail including text messages and  emails.   53. If an individual provides their contact details in response to a  leaflet about a particular local campaign, an organisation   cannot assume that t he individual will always be happy to  receive promotional emails, text messages etc about other  issues from its political campaign.   54. If, however , the wording on a specific campaign leaflet states  clearly that if an individual chooses to  provid e an email address  or mobile phone number they are  consent ing to direct  marketing , the organisation  may then  be able to retain their  contact details and use them more widely for promotional  purposes.   55. It is important to ensure that the notification the organisation  gives to individuals about electronic mail marketing is  prominent, clear and explicit so that their choice to provide it  with their details is fully informed. Consent must be specific to  the method of communication and  to the instigator of the  message . The org anisation m ight also want to consider using  separate opt -in tick box es for each type of electronic  marketing .  56. If the organisation receives any objections from individuals , it  must ensure that it rapidly suppresses their details. Making it  easy for individu als to object and promptly respecting their  choices will help to reduce the risk of breaking the law (and of  causing individuals to complain that the organisation is not  respecting their privacy).  
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  16 57. There is no fixed time limit after which consent automatically  expires. However, consent will not remain valid forever. How  long consent remains valid will depend on the context – the  question is whether it is still reasonable to treat it as an  ongoing indication of the person’s current wishes. Any list an  organis ation maintains should be up to date, accurate, and  reliably record consent.  58. An organisation should always check that it is not going to send  direct marketing to individuals who have objected to such  contact from it.  59. Read our detailed guidance on complying with PECR and on  direct marketing  which is available on our website.  Viral marketing or ‘tell a friend ’ campaigns  GDPR Update     You must be able to demonstrate that you have obtained valid  consent, which means that y ou must keep records of  who  consented , when, how, and what you told people.      See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.       60. An organisation may be using viral marketing or “tell a friend”  campaigns to tap into social and family networks of its  supporters or potential supporters; this is where:     it asks an individual to send the original marketing message  to family or friends; or   it asks an individual to give it their family or friends’ contact  details.  61. This is  not a way of getting around the need for consent from  the recipient, and organisations should take care in the design  and implementation of these campaigns. The organisation must  still comply with the direct marketing rules.    62. Arguably, where an organisation asks an individual to forward  its message or promotional materials to an individual who has  not consented to that contact, it is encouraging them to break  the law in order to promote its political campaign. The  organisation is strongly advised to warn individuals of this and  advise them that they should only forward communications of 
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 17 this type to friends and family that they are reasonably certain  would consent and will be h appy to receive them.     63. Where an organisation sends a message to someone whose  details it has collected from a friend or family member, it will  have to assume that they have consented to that contact  through a third party (the friend or family member who ga ve it  their details). The organisation will be liable for any messages  sent to email addresses obtained from a friend or relative.  When collecting contact details, the organisation should:       ask the individual to confirm that they have the consent of  the friend or relative whose details they are passing on to  receive this contact;    check that the recipient hasn’t already objected to  marketing from the organisation. If those contact details  appear on its suppression list it may have cause to  question whether  consent has been obtained at all; and    tell the individual that it will inform the recipient of the  message how it got their details and include it in the  message to the individual.   64. The organisation should bear in mind that this method of  communication may  be used maliciously by individuals to  inconvenience or harass others or to discredit it. For example,  it is possible to envisage circumstances where a person might  give the contact details of another person to a whole range of  political campaigns whose vi ews that individual strongly  disagrees with , knowing that they would not consent to such  contact and/or will subsequently complain about those  political  campaign s. While the organisation is not responsible for the  malicious activities of an individual usin g the service it  provides, it should bear in mind that, at the very least, the  recipient may forever associate it with that unpleasant  experience. In any event, it should always identify itself,  include an address for objections and rapidly suppress the  recipient’s contact details to avoid further distress.     65. As it will be difficult for the organisation to be sure that the  friends  or family actually agreed to give their details to it , we  would advise against using this type of viral  marketing.  
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  18 Marketing by fax   66. Whilst the use of fax as a means of communication has  substantially reduced, we set out the provisions here for the  avoidance of doubt. If the user of the fax is an individual as  opposed to a corporate subscriber, the organisation must have  their explicit consent to receive promotional material from it by  fax.    67. If the organisation is collecting fax numbers from individuals in  order to use them for direct marketing, it will need to inform  them that their information will be used in that way and obtain  their consent.     68. The organisation must identify itself in the fax and provide an  address or number where it can be reached free of charge.    69. The organisation cannot send unsolicited marketing to  individuals, including corporate subscribers, who have  registered with the Fax Preference Service (FPS) or who have  advised  it directly that they do not want to receive direct  marketing.    70. If it adds fax numbers to postal addresses, even if it is aiming  to contact an existing supporter, the organisation must make  sure it screens its list against the FPS list first, unless the  supporter has agreed to receive promotional faxes from it. For  more information, please visit the FPS website .  Objection s to direct marketing from individuals   GDPR Update     If you are relying on consent to send marketing by post then  the individual has the right to withdraw  their consent at any  time. It must be as easy to withdrawn consent as it was to  give it.     See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.     The GDPR also gives individuals the right to object at any time  to processing of their personal data for t he purposes of direct  marketing. T he right to object to marketing is absolute and  you must stop processing for these p urposes when someone  objects .  
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  19   See our right to object  guidance for further details.       71. Individuals have an absolute right under section 11 of the DPA  to object to direct marketing from any organisation and the  processing of their information for direct marketing purposes.  However this is subject to the right of a candidate, political  party or referendum campaigner to send a Freepost mailing, as  described in paragraph 16 .     72. An organisation must respect any written request it receives  from an individual not to send them promotional material  (other than election or referendum Freepost mailings as  mentioned above) or otherwise process their personal  information for direct marketing purposes. In those cases the  organisation will not be able to contact an individual to promote  its aims or ideals by post, email, text, video and voicemail  messages to their mobile phone and automated or live calling.  It will also be unable to use their information in any profiling of  people in a particular area or other manipulation of a larger  dataset to determine whom to contact with direct marketing  during a campaign.    73. An organisation should keep a list of individuals who have  exercised their right to object and screen all of its prospective  communications against it, or it should have some other  process to ensure that it does not contact individuals in  circumstances where it has been asked not to.    74. Where a constituency party, local association or local campaign  group has a separate legal identity from its national  organisation, then a request to one of them not to send  promotional material does not automatically apply to the  others. However, it is unlikely that most members of the public  will appreciate this separation. It would, therefore, be good  practice on receiving an objection of this sort to check whether  the individual also requires the request to be passed on to the  other entitie s.    75. The structure of a political party also affects whether it has  responsibility under the DPA for the actions of its candidates  during an election. As mentioned earlier, it is important for a  political party and its local offices, its candidates and its staff  and volunteers to be clear on who is the data controller. Again,  this is something that few members of the public are likely to  appreciate, and adverse publicity about a candidate’s actions 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  20 can obviously reflect badly on the political party as a whole. It  therefore makes good sense to encourage candidates to comply  with the DPA.  Marketing lists comp iled by third parties   GDPR Update     If you are buying a ‘consented’ marketing list, the consent  request must have identified you specifically. Even precisely  defined categories will not be enough to give you valid  informed consent under the GDPR definition.     You must keep records to demonst rate what the individual has  consented to, including what they were told, and when and  how they consented .     See our GDPR consent  guidance for further details.     If you buy personal data from another organisation, you must  provide people with your own transparency information  detailing anything that they haven’t already been told.     See our guidance on the right to be informed  for further  details.       76. The use of third parties requires particular care. If the  organisation purchases contact details of individuals from a  third party such as a list broker it needs to be sure that the  third party has obtained the data fairly and lawfully. If the  organisation intends to use the list to send electronic  marketing, it also needs to ensure that individuals have  consented to receiving these forms of contact.     77. Therefore an explanation must have been given to the  individual by the list broker, or other person who provided the  broker with the information, about how their information would  be used, including by the organisation and they must have  indicated their consent in some way. The explanation given to  the individual must have been in broad enough terms to clearly  include promotional messages from the organisation’s political  campaign. Once it has those assurances, it is for the  organisation to decide whether that individual would welcome  contact from it in that form. If the organisation employs a third 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  21 party to send out electronic communications, it must ensure  the third party follows these rules.    78. Read our direct marketing guidance  for further information on  buying a marketing list.  Using analytics   GDPR Update     Currently, the 1998 Act allows you to make transparency  information ‘readily available’, but under the GDPR you must  actively provide people with the information in a way that is  easy for them to access. Putting a notice on your website  without letting peo ple know it’s there will not be good enough.  See our guidance on the right to be informed  for further  details.       79. The big data revolution has made available new and powerful  technical means to analyse extremely large and varied  datasets. These can include traditional datasets such as the  electoral register but also information which people have made  publicly accessible on Facebook, Twitter and other social media.  Research and profiling carried out by and on behalf of political  parties  can now benefit from these advanced analytical tools .  The outputs may be used to understand general trends in the  electorate, or to find and influence potential voters .    80. Whatever the purpose of the processing, it is subject to the  DPA if it involves data from which living individuals can be  identified. This brings with it duties for the party commissioning  the analytics and rights for the individuals to whom the data  relates. It includes the duty to tell people how their data is  being used. While people might expect that the electoral  register is used for election campaigns they may well not be  aware of how other data about them can be used and  combined in complex analytics. If a political organisation is  collecting data directly from people eg via a website or obtains  it from another source, it has to tell them what it is going to do  with the data. In the case of data obtained from another  source, the organisation may make the information available in  other ways, eg on its website, if contacting individuals directly  would involve disproportionate effort. It cannot simply choose  to say nothing, and the possible complexity of the analytics is 
    Political campaigning  20180326  Version 3.1  22 not an excuse for ignoring this requirement. Our code of  practice on privacy notices, transparency and control  provides  advice on giving people this information.  81. Even where information about individuals is apparently publicly  accessible, this does not automatically mean that it can be reused for another purpose. If a political organisation collects and  processes this data, then it is a data controller for that data,  and has to comply with the requirements of the DPA in relation  to it.  82. If a political organisation, as data controller, commissions a  third party company to carry out analytics, then that company  is likely to be a data processor. The political organisation needs  to take account of the DPA provisions on the data controllerdata processor relationship. In particular there must be a  written contract which requires the data processor to have  arrangements in place to ensure the security of the data and  that the personal data is processed under instructions and for  specified purposes. Our guidance on data controllers and data  processors  explains this relationship in more detail.  Data protection principles   GDPR Update     The GDPR contains  similar provisions to the 1998 Act  principles however it also contains  a new principle on  accountability  which requires you to be able to demonstrate  your compliance with the GDPR principles . See our Guide to  GDPR  for further information.       83. An organisation will need to comply with the principles of good  information handling from the point at which it first collects  personal information to the moment it is deleted. It will need to  be aware of what it holds and why and it should routinely  assess and amend the information to ensure that it is fit for  purpose. Amongst other things this will require the organisation  to:   be transparent about its use of the individual’s information  and respect their preferences;   use it only in ways that are compatible with the purposes  it or a third party provider has informed the individual of; 
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 23  not collect any more information than it needs for the  purpose it has told the individual about;    ensure that it does not keep the information for longer   than necessary to fulfil those purposes;    keep the information secure and delete or securely destroy  information when it has served its purpose;    respect individuals’ rights of access to information it holds  about them and to object to the organisation usin g their  information;  and   only send the information outside the European Economic  Area where it has taken steps to ensure it is protected.   See the information for organisations on our website for detailed  guidance  on the application of the DPA.  Elected representative s changing to a different political  party   84. Elected representatives  are data controllers for all the personal  data handled by their office. Where an  elected representative   leaves one political party and seeks re -election with another  party, there are implications in relation to the personal data  that, up to that point, ha d been processed by their office.     85. Personal data should only be processed in line with the  expectations of an individual. If there is any doubt as to  whether  an individual would expect or would be happy for an  MP who now represents a different party to continue to use  their data  for marketing and campaigning purposes , the MP  should seek the individual’s consent .    86. We suggest that political parties should provide guidance about  these scenarios for  elected representatives and their offices.    More information   87. This guidance has been developed drawing on ICO experience .  It will be reviewed and considered from time to time in line  with new decisions of the Information Commissioner, Tribunal s  and courts .  
    Political campaigning   20180326   Version  3.1 24 88. It is a guide to our general recommended approach, although  individual cases will always be decided on the basis of their  particular circumstances.   89. Organisations that  need any more information about this or any  other aspect of data protection  should  please contact us .        
