Application Guide May 2021IA ETHICS SELF-ASSESSMENT FOR ACTORS OF THE ENTREPRENEURIAL ECOSYSTEM 
Copyright © 2021 Inter-American Development Bank. This work  is licensed under a Creative Commons IGO 3.0 AttributionNonCommercial-NoDerivatives (CC-IGO BY-NC-ND 3.0 IGO) license  (https:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/igo/legalcode ) and may be reproduced with attribution to the IDB and for any  non-commercial purpose. No derivative work is allowed.  Any dispute related to the use of the works of the IDB that cannot  be settled amicably shall be submitted to arbitration pursuant to the  UNCITRAL rules. The use of the IDB’s name for any purpose other  than for attribution, and the use of IDB’s logo shall be subject to a  separate written license agreement between the IDB and the user  and is not authorized as part of this CC-IGO license.  Note that link provided above includes additional terms and  conditions of the license.   The opinions expressed in this work are those of the authors and do  not necessarily reflect the views of the IDB, its Board of Directors  or the countries they represent, nor of the MIF (IDB Lab) Donors  Committee or the countries it represents.      1
fAIr LAC, the IDB Group initiative that promotes the ethical  and responsible use of artificial intelligence, through IDB Lab  has developed a practical AI ethical self-assessment tool for  entrepreneurs, which allows an analysis of the technological  solutions based on AI and data management. This diagnosis  helps entrepreneurs to improve their product development,  while identifying the main areas of attention to prevent errors,  biases, discrimination and exclusions resulting from technological  deployment. The ethical self-assessment of AI for entrepreneurs  that you have in your hands is the first product of fAIr LAC for  entrepreneurs, which is a Guideline with a multidisciplinary  approach that includes six main dimensions: 1. Conceptualization  and design, 2. Governance and security, 3. Human involvement  in AI systems, 4. AI life cycle (data and algorithms), 5. Relevant  actors and 6. Communications. The purpose is for entrepreneurs to  have a quick reference of which are the most important aspects to  consider in each of these dimensions, in order to have a complete  vision of the ethical implications of their products and thus  establish the pertinent improvement and mitigation measures.  The main innovation of this document lies in two main aspects:  the first, by not only placing the onus of self-regulation solely  on entrepreneurs, but also involving two key actors for the  ecosystem: project funders and accelerators. The second aspect is  that the guiding questions correspond to three levels of business  development from early stages from the ideation to more mature  ventures or small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that  develop innovative products. Likewise, although the document is  primarily intended to guide the development and implementation  of AI-based solutions, it is also useful for solutions based on data management. We invite those interested to download the publication and to  be part of the entrepreneurial journey to develop technological  solutions with social impact that contribute to sustained regional  development that leaves no one behind.
AUTHORS ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS César Said Rosales Torres César BuenadichaTetsuro NaritaFirst and foremost, we would like to thank Irene Arias, CEO of IDB  Lab, and Marcelo Cabrol, Manager of the Social Sector at IDB for  their continuous support and leadership on the initiative.  We express our deep gratitude to the IDB Lab team for their time  and William Ernest, Paula Auerbach, Jessica Leite, Patricio Aznar,  Cecilia Franco, as well as to Mara Balestrini. In the same way, the IDB  LAB team appreciates the collaboration and feedback of the  following experts in the field of Artificial Intelligence, as well as to  the members of the project’s Advisory Board. The list is presented  below in alphabetical order: Adrián Soto, professor at the Faculty of Engineering and Sciences at  the Adolfo Ibáñez University. Chile. Cecilia Tham, Co-Founder and CEO of All Women. Spain.  Constanza Gómez Mont, founder and CEO of C Minds. Mexico.  Enrique Cortés Rello, director of the Artificial Intelligence Hub,  Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey. Mexico.  Francesca Gabetti, Founder and CEO of TeamEQ. Spain. Irene Velasco, founder and CEO of helKi. Mexico. Iván Caballero, founder and CEO of Citibeats. Spain. Jesús Cepeda, co-founder and CEO of OS City. Mexico. Juan Carlos Holguin, co-founder and CEO of LinkIn. Ecuador . Juan Eduardo Orlandi, General Manager of Magical. Chile. Juan Roberto Hernández Villalobos, coordinator of fAIr Jalisco of  the Instituto Tecnológico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey.  Mexico. Leo Prieto, founder and CEO of Odd Industries. Chile. Leopoldo Bertossi, professor at the Faculty of Engineering and  Sciences of the Adolfo Ibáñez University. Chile. Lorena Barrenechea, legal advisor to the Inter-American  Development Bank. María Paz Hermosilla, director of the GobLab of the Adolfo Ibáñez  University. Chile. Nacho Lafuente, founder and CEO of Datumize. Spain. Natalia Gon zález, consultant for the In ter-Amer ican Deve lopmen t Bank.  Ricardo Baeza-Yat es, Research Director at the Institute f or Experime ntal  AI in Northeastern University, USA. Robe rto Sánc hez, consult ant for the Inter- American Devel opmen t Bank.  Romina Garrido, associate researcher at the GobLab of the Adolfo  Ibáñez University. Chile. Sylvia Chebi, CEO of ThalesLab. Uruguay .      3
Introduction    6 How to use this tool  12 Conceptualization and design  14  1.1 Determining the main purpose of AI in business operations 15  1.2 Assessment of the digital ecosystem 17   1.2.1 Technical assessment 17    1.2.1.1 Determination of the Technology Readiness     Level (TRL)   1.2.2  Legal assessment 19   1.2.3 Sectoral assessment 22  1.3 Social and environmental impact 25 Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI  28  2.1 Corporate structure for the governance of AI 30  2.2 Risk management and internal controls 32   2.2.1 Data security 34 Human involvement in AI systems  36  3.1 Human-AI interaction determining the level of        human supervision 38 AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management  40  4.1 Data source and management 41   4.1.1 Data type 42   4.1.2 Data processing 44   4.1.3 Data integrity and confidentiality 45   4.1.4 Privacy by design 46   4.1.5 Interoperability 47   4.1.6 Testing and validation 48INDEX      4
 4.2 Model development: Algorithms 49   4.2.1 Traceability 49   4.2.2 Explicability of AI processes and results 50   4.2.3 Replicability 52   4.2.4 Reproducibility 53   4.2.5 Auditability 54   4.2.6 Maintenance 55 Relationship with key stakeholders  56  5.1 Transparency 58  5.2 Consumers and users of the system 59  5.3 Access to financing 60 Communications  63 Annex 1 - Description of the Stages of Business Development  66 Sources  69INDEX      5
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION   During the last decade, Artificial Intelligence (AI) has seen significant  growth, despite false starts in previous decades mainly caused by overly  optimistic expectations about the level of technological development  of AI, the lack of historical data infrastructure and high-quality data in  various sectors of the economy, as well as multiple market factors and  large-scale commercial use of these technologies (MGI 2017).  Currently, the picture is very different,  thanks to scientific developments  in recent years and the commercial  application of AI at scale in sectors such  as automated vehicles, natural language  processing, facial recognition, computer  vision, among others. (MGI 2017; OECD  2018). This new dynamic, in turn, has  aroused greater among investors and  governments to promote and facilitate  the growth of AI ecosystems, while at the  same time regulating essential aspects  such as data protection, human-AI  interaction, and the impact it could have on people’s social and political life  (OECD 2018).  However, despite this progress, the  degree of AI adoption remains relatively  low in the world compared to other  technologies and highly concentrated in geographical areas such as the United  States, Canada, China, and Europe, each with different governance and  investment models (Gigler 2020).  Likewise, there is a gap between  large corporations and startups in  getting access to financing and other  (fAIr LAC Entrepreneurial Journey)“Entrepreneurial Journey: articulación de un ecosistema ético y responsable de startups de inteligencia artificial”       7
resources. In Latin America, the level  of AI development remains low when  compared to the rest of the leading  regions and concentrated in countries  such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay,  where AI is mainly used for technological  developments based in third-party  models, chatbots, natural language  processing, and text conversion, and  to a lesser extent for classification and  prediction purposes (Everis & Endeavor  2018). In addition to the disparity in the  levels of development and investment  with the United States, Canada, China,  and Europe, Latin America faces  low levels of both public and private  investment, as well as limitations for the  professional development of experts  in data management and the creation  of data value chains on which machine  learning-based AI systems can operate  more efficiently (OECD 2018).  In this context, at the end of 2019, the  Inter-American Development Bank and  IDB LAB launched an initiative called  fAIr LAC to promote the ethical and  responsible use of AI in the region.  The main objective is to harness the  technology’s immense potential to create  more efficient, fair, and personalized  social services for the citizens of Latin  America and the Caribbean (IDB 2020).  Today, more countries are making use of this type of technology that touches  practically all areas of development in  the region, so it is essential to respect the  privacy of citizens’ data and anticipate  possible biases in the construction of  algorithms (Google 2018). Within the framework of this initiative,  IDB LAB started in 2020 the project  “Entrepreneurial Journey: articulation  of an ethical and responsible ecosystem  of artificial intelligence startups,” which  aims to contribute to the strengthening  of entrepreneurial ecosystems for  the adoption of AI, with the support  of entrepreneurs, investors, business  accelerators, data experts, academia, civil  society, and government. This is achieved  through tools and services that allow  entrepreneurs to use this technology  dynamically and innovatively, in line with  ethical principles that maximize benefits  and minimize risks.  Introduction      8
The document in your hands is the first  product of the “Entrepreneurial Journey”  project within the fAIr LAC initiative,  and it is a self-assessment guide for  companies, investors, and accelerators  on crucial aspects to consider ethical  aspects of business operations, according  to the various level of maturity of the  startups. The innovation of this tool lies  in two main aspects: first, it does not  place the onus of self-assessment and  risk management solely on entrepreneurs,  but involves two key actors for the  ecosystem: project funders and  accelerators. The second aspect is that  the guiding questions correspond to  three levels of companies’ development  from the early stage, going through a later stage to mature companies that  can be presented to larger rounds  of financing. Likewise, the document  takes a broad approach to artificial  intelligence, recognizing that many Latin  American companies have robust data  management capabilities that could  be conducive to the development and  adoption of AI technologies.   More so, the development of this product  rests on the following principles for the  ethical and responsible adoption of AI  for the development of Latin America  and the Caribbean, while considering  the ethical principles for AI of the OECD  (OECD 2019), namely:  Introduction      9
AI for development Integrity Trust and confidenceThis project aims at promoting initiatives that use AI for positive  and scalable social impact, in order to continue improving the  economic and social well-being of the citizens of the region. The development and use of AI systems should be consistent with  their purpose of social impact, in addition to respecting the use of  data and metadata from clients and third parties with systems that  guarantee their reliability.  Confidence in the use of AI technology should be based on a harm  prevention and risk mitigation approach and the transparency of  its operations. All this to guarantee principles of equity and nondiscrimination in the use of this technology. Introduction      10
Finally, the ethical dimension of this  project is not only observed through  the legal fulfillment of the obligations  of the companies but also the solidity  of the proposals and the objectives of technological use for the benefit,  empowerment, and protection of  common goods, highlighting above all  human dignity and commonly accepted  social principles. Introduction      11
HOW TO USE THIS TOOL   This self-assessment tool of voluntary adoption is aimed at those who  design, develop, deploy or use Artificial Intelligence technologies, as  well as big data handling, including companies in different development  stages, investors, and accelerators. But it is also a useful tool for all those  interested in the processes of adopting artificial intelligence ethically  and responsibly.  stages (the details can be found in  Annex 1 of this document) according to  the enterprise’s level of development,  the level of technological development,  and the actors who participate in each  one of these stages. These stages are  non-rigid, pre-established concepts, but  rather a minimal guidance to better use  and understand the guiding questions in  each dimension. In this sense, although  the questions are intended to be  ordered according to the companies’  development level, some questions may  apply to different stages according to The tool is a non-exhaustive general  guide of questions that allow identifying  the purpose of using AI, strengthening  governance structures and internal  controls around AI systems, determining  the best balance of human involvement  in AI, follow up on the data control  processes and algorithms, as well as  suggestions on the relationship with key  stakeholders such as users and clients,  investors and supervisory bodies. It is a progressive ethical self-assessment  matrix since it is divided into three       12 Introduction
the particularities of the business or  sector in which it operates. Likewise,  it is relevant to remember that this  guide is not a compliance list, but a  versatile list adaptable to the needs of  each entrepreneur, investor, or anyone  interested in the ethical and responsible  use of AI. The main objective of this tools  is to help entrepreneurs improve their  solutions from an ethical perspective, as  well as to identify and mitigate risks.  This is the first version of the selfassessment, which has received the  review, comments, and guidance of  entrepreneurs, investors, legal experts,  and data scientists, to guarantee its ease  of use and relevance of the document. It  is an iterative process in which a broad  consultation round is planned with more  companies, academics, civil society, governments, investors, lawyers, and  data scientists to improve the ethical  self-assessment and carry out a pilot  testing phase that allows Identify strategic  actions to strengthen the entrepreneurial  ecosystem in AI. We hope that this tool will be useful for  all those interested in the ethical and  responsible use of AI and contributes  to the strengthening of the ecosystem  to promote the competitiveness of  companies in the region while achieving a  positive social impact.      13 Introduction
CONCEPTUALIZATION AND DESIGN 1
1 CONCEPTUALIZATION AND DESIGN    This first section includes various initial aspects that should be  considered before the adoption of AI as a base technology for startups. These aspects include the determining the operational purpose of the AI and the legal, technical, and sectorial assessments  necessary to define the degree of suitability of the technology in  business operations. In addition, there is a section of guiding questions related to social impact.        	 DETERMINING	THE	MAIN 		 PURPOSE	OF	AI	IN	BUSINESS		 	 OPERATIONS	 	 The first step for the adoption and  responsible and ethical use of Artificial  Intelligence (AI) is to define the utility  that such system will generate for  the business model and its suitability  within the corporate strategy. This  stage requires a realistic and tangible  assessment of the capabilities and  limitations that the AI system would  have (WEF & IMDA 2020). It is also  advisable carrying out a detailed  analysis of use cases in similar sectors  to maximize the chances of success  and reduce the margin of uncertainty  of the initiative based on previous  experiences in applying AI. Finally, in order to understand the usefulness of  the AI system, it is possible to carry out  comparative assessments of the solutions  with or without the use of AI models.  At this first moment, it should noted  that for the ethical and responsible  adoption of AI, it is advisable to think  about solutions to real problems for  which AI is the most suitable technology,  beyond simply incorporating AI to offer  interesting products to the market based  on this technology. (MGI 2017; Szramke  2017; EC 2018; IMDA & PDPC 2020).1.1       15 1. How to use this tool
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas the organization or  company set a goal with  impact metrics for its business  operations in which AI is the  most appropriate technology,  beyond just offering the  incorporation of innovative  technology in its products or services? What kinds of tasks are  intended to be carried out  with the AI system, such as:  automatic decision-making,  predictions, recommendations,  interaction with users, etc.? What type of AI technology is  going to be used, for example:  machine learning (ML), deep  learning or deep learning,  artificial neural networks,  computer vision or natural  language processing (NLP),  virtual agents, smart robotics, or autonomous vehicles?Have examples of use cases  been explored in which AI  technologies or similar have  been used for the purposes  established by the company for  your particular case? Have the lessons learned  from similar use cases been  incorporated in terms of the type of AI technology and sector?Have comparative studies been carried out between  different technologies or  methods to determine if AI is the simplest and most  appropriate fit? For example, through the use of programming or  simulation exercises that do not make use of AI. In case AI is the most suitable  set of technologies for the  company’s purposes, has a  comparison been made between the different AI models to determine which  would be the most efficient? For example, rule-based models or models based on  machine learning through big data.   Once the type of AI model  has been determined, has it  been decided which kind of  algorithm would be the most  appropriate to use?  For example: regression  algorithms, decision trees,  clusters, or neural networks.INVESTORSIs the approach to AI  deployment in line with the  fund’s investment thesis?  in addition to having a clear  business purpose. Is the company moving towards  AI from another type of data  usage or processing?Is the selection of the type of AI consistent with the purposes  for which the AI will be used?ACCELERATORSDo the company’s founding  partners have a minimal  understanding of the benefits  and risks of adopting AI? Do business partners and  employees have minimal  understanding of the benefits  and risks of adopting AI? Same. 1. How to use this tool      16
	 		ASSESSMENT	OF	THE 	 		DIGITAL	ECOSYSTEM 	 The evaluation of the digital ecosystem  allows companies to carry out recognition  of the technological infrastructure  that allows assessing the viability and  usefulness of the development of an AI system through certain technical, legal, and sectorial characteristics  (Galdon 2020).1.2.1 Technical assessment  This dimension makes it possible to  evaluate in technical terms the  availability of data and minimum  critical infrastructure to guarantee the  operability of the AI system with a risk  prevention approach (EC 2018; IMDA & PDPC 2020).1.2   1. How to use this tool      17
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre there various sources  of historical data that allow  the creation of an AI model?  For example, data lakes,  government initiatives such as smart cities, etc. Is it possible to access the data  from these sources? How is it guaranteed to obtain  complete, up-to-date, and  high-quality data? Is there sufficient information  and telecommunication  infrastructure to guarantee  the constant operability of the  AI model?  Has the initiative considered the recommendations issued by international  standardization bodies that  facilitate compliance with legal obligations?Has the need to require  additional data been  considered in order to reduce  biases? Regarding the AI system’s  architecture, have the set of  rules and restrictions been  established on which the AI  system should operate and not  violate? In the case of using AI  models for robotics, have  considerations been taken  to determine the sufficiency  of all the technical elements  required based on an SMPA  (Sense-Model-Plan-Act) model  so that all the elements of the  environment can be recognized  and that the consideration  of plans and actions of the  system meet the expectations  of behavior and results? In this  sense, it is important to define  the behavioral expectations of  the system clearly.Same.INVESTORSThrough what type of interface  will you interact with customers,  websites, apps, etc.?Is the information in the AI  system also accessible to  users using various types of  technological platforms?What is the level of  technological maturity of the  initiative?ACCELERATORSIs any business or technical  data support required to  consolidate the project? 1. How to use this tool      18
1.2.1.1 Determination of the Technology  Readiness Level (TRL) Particularly for some financing rounds, it  is advisable to determine the technology  readiness level of the proposed  development. Usually, international  organizations such as the European  Union use a conceptual framework with  the following levels of technological  development (European Commission  2014-2015):1.2.2 Legal assessment  The use of AI and related technologies  must usually comply with the legal  provisions regarding the protection of  personal data and consumer protection  and some other sectoral regulations  specific to the environment for which the  AI system is developed (Galdon 2020).  Level 1  Level 2  Level 3  Level 4 Observed and reported basic  principles; Concept and technological  application formulated;  Experimental proof of concept;  Level 5  Assessment of component  and arrangement in a relevant  environment;Validation of components and layout in a laboratory  environment;  Level 6  Level 7  Level 8  Level 9 Prototype demonstration in a  relevant environment;  Demonstration of a system  prototype in an operating  environment;  Complete system and  certified through tests and  demonstrations;  System successfully tested in a  real environment.  1. How to use this tool      19
Moreover, depending on the level of  impact of the AI solution on people’s life,  it should comply with regulations for the  protection of vulnerable communities  such as children, the disabled, and  historically disadvantaged populations  or at risk of exclusion (General Data  Protection Regulation of the European  Union 2016-2018). In this same sense,  it should comply with international  standards on human rights, especially for those initiatives addressing social  problems in sectors such as health,  education, work, and economy. In  particular, it is important to verify that  the use of AI respects the right to nondiscrimination since biased data could  lead to the perpetuation of unequal  treatment of population groups that  traditionally suffer from unfavorable  treatment.  1. How to use this tool      20
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESDoes the system comply  with the regulations on data  protection and privacy, and  consumer protection from its design?  Are there specific sectoral  regulations that apply to the  system? Does the system  comply with these regulations?  Will the AI system have any kind of interaction with  vulnerable populations that  require special considerations?Will the system have any  relevant impact on the  community’s social, economic,  or political life that requires  the revision of particular  regulations in this regard? In case the AI system is being  used to solve social problems,  have the most relevant  international standards  regarding the protection of  human rights been reviewed,  such as the right to nondiscrimination and other  fundamental rights, mainly in the framework of the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights, protocols and additional resolutions?INVESTORSHas it been determined if the  initiative complies with the  applicable regulations and if  the eventual breach of the  company’s legal obligations  could cause the interruption  of the business, sanctions, or  fines that make it unviable or,  in limited cases, in the region,  transfer the responsibility to  funding entities? Even if it complies with national  regulations, does the company  adhere to the rest of the  countries’ regulations where it  has operations?Is the information of the  system available to access  from different technological  platforms?What is the level of  technological development of the solution?    ACCELERATORSHas a legal feasibility analysis of the AI model been carried out?  Has the company protected  its intellectual property   by registering a patent or  corresponding as the case may be? If the operations of the proposed technological solutions are not contemplated  in current legislation, have the   legal mechanisms been structured to allow their  operability? Such as permits and authorizations or risk  mitigation measures. 1. How to use this tool      21
1.2.3 Sectoral assessment AI is a set of technologies that, due  to its versatility, can be used in a wide  variety of sectors and industries. This  heterogeneity requires a very specific  analysis of the dynamics that occur in  each industry. However, this section offers some minimum parameters to  consider when identifying opportunities  for the ethical and responsible use of AI  (EC 2018; Omidyar 2019; Galdon 2020;  MacCarthy 2020; WEF & IMDA 2020). 1. How to use this tool      22
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESWhat type of need does the AI  system cover, one previously  identified or one that had not  been yet registered in the  sector? In case the company has  decided to build its data, has it  implemented a methodology  that allows knowing the  systemic impact of the sector  in which it will work? Is the available data  representative of the sector’s  user base?  Does the available data come  from heterogeneous sources  within the same industry, and  are there enough data sources  for AI systems based on  machine learning?  Do engineers and developers  know the specific industry  environment in which they will  work in value chains and data  systems? Has the importance of data  quality been discussed with  decision-makers for the impact  on decision making?Does the company have a  dedicated AI governance  group that conducts regular  assessments of emerging  public or policy concerns  about using the AI system  in the industry in which it  operates? Have industry standards been  adopted for the best use of  data and technologies such as AI? Are there ongoing internal  and external training and  education methods on ethics,  AI systems thinking, and Data Science?Is there the collaboration of  other key players in the sector  for periodic reviews of the AI  system’s operation? Have data protection  agreements or protocols been  established with the rest of the partners and actors within the sector value chain? Have internal audits been  carried out to assess the  implementation of the best  practices established in the  early stages? Are measures of the impact of interventions carried out in the sector?INVESTORSHow well do companies know  the sector for which they plan to develop an AI solution? Does the product or solution  solve a relevant problem for the sector? Have investors been  communicated that the  acquisition and structuring  of quality data require  consideration within the  investment items? Could the system’s benefits be  scalable to other areas of the  value chain or even to other  related sectors? 1. How to use this tool      23
INCUBATORSDo they have advisors, mentors,  or tools to communicate  the importance of ethical  considerations in using AI and  data science?Is there a mechanism for  rapprochement between  entrepreneurs and actors in the sector that allows knowing  the technological solution’s  impact? 1. How to use this tool      24
   SOCIAL	AND 	 		ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPACT Depending on the type of functionality  that the AI system has, there are  times when it could have significant  repercussions for the communities’ social  and environmental well-being in which  it operates. Therefore, the organization  that adopts or uses AI must consider  measures that ensure diversity, nondiscrimination, and equity in sectors  such as education, health, environment,  economy, and labor markets (EC 2018;  Omidyar 2019). Likewise, the AI system must take into  special consideration its impact or  influence on vulnerable populations,  such as minors, people with disabilities,  historically disadvantaged groups, and at  risk of exclusion (General Data Protection  Regulation of the European Union 2016  -2018).1.3    1. How to use this tool      25
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESDoes the system respect  fundamental principles of  equity and non-discrimination  in general and towards  vulnerable populations? Is the AI system the best tool  to generate a positive social  impact, or are there other  alternatives?  Has the potential negative  social impact of AI been  analyzed to assess the severity  of the errors? For example,  through a confusion matrix  that allows visualizing the  performance of the algorithms.  Has the scope of the social  impact of the use of the AI  system  been assessed to  establish proportional risk  mitigation measures? E.g.  the development of a user  recommendation system would  not have the same level of  impact as that of a decisionmaking system for the selection  of beneficiaries of a health or  social assistance program. If the AI system is designed to  be used by children, people  with disabilities, or at risk of  exclusion, what protection  measures exist for these  groups?Does the AI system feed any  decision-making process that  has a social impact? If so, what  measures are taken to ensure  the principles of equity and  non-discrimination? Is there a strategy or procedure  to counteract biases from  reality, such as discrimination  and prejudice?   Are there mechanisms to  indicate problems related to  bias and discrimination due to  the use of AI? In addition to the  considerations of the previous  question, does the system have  data correction mechanisms  that allow knowing and  correcting automated decision  criteria? Derived from the previous  point, are there mechanisms  that allow users to present,  process, and follow up on  claims? Does the consent policy on the  use of the AI system include  provisions regarding the  authorization of use to minors  by their parents or guardians  and disabled persons?Does the solution generate some kind of power or  information asymmetry? If  so, are there mechanisms to  promptly identify and correct  these imbalances? Is there an evaluation and  correction procedure established in the event of a  negative social impact? Where appropriate, have  mechanisms been established  to measure the environmental  impact of the AI system’s  deployment? Have measures been designed  to reduce potential negative  impacts on the AI system’s use  during the project cycle?INVESTORSIs there an approach and  delimitation on a specific social problem to be solved  for which AI is the most  straightforward and appropriate  technology to use? Has the community in which the  solution will be deployed been  involved or consulted on the  development of the AI system?Are there metrics to assess the  social and economic impact  of the deployment of the AI  system?Does the company carry out a  periodic impact assessment on  using the AI system around the  specific problem it addresses,  using methodologies such as  Maslow’s Pyramid of Needs? 1. How to use this tool      26
ACCELERATORSIs the product commercially  viable and offering benefits  to consumers, individuals,  and communities where it  will be used?Does the company  document all the possible  risks of using the AI system  and accompany them with  mitigation strategies? 1. How to use this tool      27
2 GOVERNANCE AND SECURITY:  INTERNAL GOVERNANCE  STRUCTURES AND CONTROL OF AI
2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI2 GOVERNANCE AND SECURITY: INTERNAL GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES AND CONTROL OF AI   Companies can create or update their governance frameworks and  internal controls to ensure transparency and accountability of AI related  to its development, deployment, and use. The selection of these models  depends on the structure of the organization, size, available resources,  and the particular sector in which it operates (Omidyar 2019; WEF &  IMDA 2020). This section offers some guiding questions to help analyze and  identify the best corporate governance structures to ensure ethical and  responsible AI adoption.           29
	 CORPORATE	STRUCTURE	FOR		 	 THE	GOVERNANCE	OF	AI The corporate structure of companies  willing to adopt, deploy or use AI should  have organizational arrangements that  allow the identification, evaluation,  documentation and resolution of  fundamental tensions between its  principles and the technical problems that  result from the use of this technology  (WEF & IMDA 2020). In this sense, it  is necessary to assess what type of  management model on AI is more  appropriate, for example, between  centralized or decentralized systems with  a certain degree of human intervention or  without it (Google 2018). From a crosscutting perspective, it  is recommended to create an ethics 2.1   council with executives and managers  directly involved with the various areas  of AI operation, such as management  and the board of directors, the legal  department, product development,  quality assurance, human resources,  purchases, and acquisitions, developers  and daily operations, in order to resolve  controversies resulting from the use of  the AI systems (WEF & IMDA 2020). As a  result, it is recommended that companies  have direct communication structures  with external public or sector supervision  groups that allow the exchange of  acceptable practices, the debate on  problems or controversies, and the timely  notification of emerging issues resulting in  the use of such technology.  2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      30
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas an officer within the  company been appointed to  conduct the ethical assessment  of the AI solution?  Has an assessment been made  as to whether the company’s  corporate structure should be  modified in any way to facilitate  AI adoption, especially in case  of accelerated growth of the  company? Is the personnel in charge of  the supervision, management,  and control of the AI system  adequately trained and  aware of their role and  responsibilities? Do the teams linked to the AI system’s management  have the necessary tools and  capacities at their disposal  to adequately fulfill their  responsibilities?Has the creation of an ethical  review board been considered  on the adoption of AI? Is the use of external guidance  from a trusted source  envisaged to monitor ethics  and accountability issues and  internal initiatives? Has the adaptation of risk  management structures  been considered for the  incorporation of AI control  processes? Is there a Code of Conduct on  the use and operations of the  AI system?Are there institutional  mechanisms for the coordination of the AI system with third parties,  such as suppliers, consumers, distributors, and  other workers? Has the creation of a collegiate body for the control of AI been considered,  made up of representatives of  departments that work directly  with the AI system? Has a Code of Conduct on AI been developed to  distribute to all company  employees to be aware of the  AI governance and control  processes?INVESTORSHave the organization’s  corporate structure and the  specific roles that executives  have in terms of AI governance  and control been shared? Does the company have a Chief Technology Officer, Chief Product Officer, and/ or Chief Data Officer or Data  Protection Officer? Have  you been assigned specific  responsibility for leading the ethical assessment of AI adoption?  Does the company have a  strong team of data scientists  and engineers?Is there a distinction between  technical staff and business  staff’s responsibilities and  involvement regarding their  attributions concerning the AI system?ACCELERATORSAre learning and education  mechanisms provided  for employee capacity  development leading to the  adoption and maintenanc of AI?  2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      31
 RISK	MANAGEMENT	AND		 	 INTERNAL	CONTROLS AI governance systems must be based  on a risk management approach allowing  early identification of potential difficulties  for the system and the mitigation of  unintended damage that may have  resulted from the misuse of AI. Therefore,  it is suggested that risk management  systems be based on privacy protection  models by default (EC 2018; Galdon  2020; Omidyar 2019, Hoepman 2020),  so that the personal data used in the  security system AI is protected at all times and that the user has control over  their data.  Internal controls should also describe  how data processing monitoring is  carried out, including details on who  processes, who controls, and with whom  the data is shared.2.2 2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      32
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre there risk management  mechanisms that can be  expanded to include AI  systems? In the case of making use of  massive data and invasive  technologies, among others,  has the possibility of carrying  out data protection impact  assessments (EIPD or PIA) been considered? Does the AI system have a data management system  in which the user can have  a minimum management  level over their personal  information? Are security mechanisms  in place for the AI system’s  critical elements throughout  the entire operational period of the system? Does the company’s board  of directors monitor and  approve risk management  methodologies?Have evaluations been carried  out within the organization to  identify risks to personnel or  business strategies? Is there a periodic evaluation  of possible risks and spaces  for discussion to address the  algorithms’ concerns?Has the board of directors of  the company adopted any tool  that allows identifying key  risks according to the level  of technological maturity of  the company, such as those  issued by the National Institute  of Standards and Technology  (NIST) or other international  standardization bodies around  cybersecurity? Are regular assessments and  updates of risk management  systems  carried out? Is there a knowledge  management strategy that allows monitoring and control  over the processes of the AI  system?INVESTORSDoes the company have risk management mechanisms  based on a default privacy  policy? Does the company’s board of  directors regularly participate  in assessments of the risk  management system and  internal controls to ensure the  AI system’s integrity? 2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      33
2.2.1 Data security Data security is one of the essential  elements within the evaluations of an AI  system since data is the input on which  the system operates and the potential  private content by users. In this way, it is  important to assess the actions leading  to the technical and organizational  protection of the AI system against  vulnerabilities and malicious agents that  can alter data, cause failures in AI models,  and its critical infrastructure in terms of software and hardware. For an AI model  to be considered safe, in most cases the  developers of AI systems should explicitly  consider those circumstances in which  potential abuses by malicious agents  could occur (EC 2018; Google 2018;  Omidyar 2019; Méndez 2020; WEF &  IMDA 2020).  2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      34
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHave vulnerabilities  assessments of the AI system  been conducted? Has the risk level of the AI  system been considered for  each specific use? Has it been considered to  what extent the system can  be used for purposes other  than those established by the  organization? E.g. there are  numerous cases of AI systems  used in electoral campaigns  that have significantly impacted  political and democratic  systems.Have acceptability thresholds  and AI governance mechanisms  been established that are  actionable in the event of a  possible eventuality? In tracking and user proximity  models, decentralized  protocols for data protection  such as DP-3T or equivalent  been considered? Have the possible risks of  using AI to third parties been  assessed, including potential  harm, characterization of the  affected audience, and severity of harm? Does the organization have  emergency protocols in place  for potential cyber-attacks and data loss, among others,  such as immediate technical  changes or human intervention to reduce risks? Have cyberattacks simulations  been carried out in which human intervention mechanisms  or total or partial disconnection  of the system have been tested?INVESTORSWhat kind of data security  models are used, such as  centralized or decentralized  protocols?Have the risks of possible  fines or penalties for legal  breach in data security that  could seriously compromise  the business’s operations and  profitability been assessed?Is a coverage clause considered for any possible  damage caused by the AI  system? If necessary, has the company  considered contracting  coverage insurance against  possible damages caused by  the AI system? Does the project consider the  responsibilities attributable  to consumer protection  regulation?  2. Governance and Security: Internal governance structures and control of AI      35
3 HUMAN INVOLVEMENT IN AI SYSTEMS
3. Human involvement in AI systems3 HUMAN INVOLVEMENT IN AI SYSTEMS   One of the most relevant elements for the ethical and responsible use of AI is identifying the tasks that require supervision, intervention, or human interaction, either to correct inaccuracies in the system or to generate an adequate interaction between users and the IA model. (Google 2018; IMDA & PDPC 2020). Similarly, and from the  position of a risk prevention approach, the appropriate degree of human involvement in AI systems should enhance human autonomy while minimizing possible conditioning, deception, or unjustified  subordination to those who use this technology. HUMAN INVOLVED NO HUMANS INVOLVEDSPECIFIC	 OBJECTIVEAssisted intelligence Automated intelligenceADAPTIVE	 SYSTEMSAugmented intelligence Autonomous intelligenceBelow, a classification table of AI by  type of use and interaction with human  beings is shared, prepared by the Social  Sector Division of the IDB, which allows assessing the correspondence of human  involvement according to the type of  decision-making process:      37
	 HUMAN-AI	INTERACTION		 	 DETERMINING	THE	LEVEL 	 OF	HUMAN	SUPERVISION The determination of the level of human  involvement in the processes, results,  and decision-making of the artificial  intelligence system will largely depend  on the impact that such processes have  on users. The most common example  used to get an idea of the gradual  impact of AI systems in its environment  is the comparison between an AI system  that is limited to issuing purchase  recommendations to users based on  their behavior and preferences versus an 3.1 AI system that has implications for road  safety of users on autonomous vehicles  (MGI 2017; EC 2018). It is evident that  both systems require different degrees  of supervision and human intervention  to prevent or correct possible adverse  expected or unexpected results of the  system (Google 2018). 3. Human involvement in AI systems      38
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas the use of tools or  models been considered to  determine the level of human  involvement based on the  system’s impact on the lives  of users? For example, through  methodologies such as human  in/out/over the loop. Has the operating cost of  the different levels of human  involvement in the AI system  been considered when  assigning specialized personnel  dedicated to these tasks? Depending on the degree of  impact of the system on users’  lives, does the system have  an immediate stop option for  human intervention?Has the appropriate level of  human control been selected  following the relevant AI  system and use cases? Do the activities or processes  in which AI will operate  require recognizing emotional  nuances, or does it merely  involve repetitive activities? Has the development of  Key Performance Indicators  (KPIs) of the AI system been  considered to help determine  human involvement’s  relevance in case the system  deteriorates?In the case of autonomous AI and machine learning  mechanisms, are there more  specific control mechanism on already identified problems? Has the development of  emergency responses based on the analysis of scenarios been considered if risk mitigation measures fail? In case the AI system can  understand or infer the emotional status of its  interlocutors, what measures  have been taken to avoid  problems of empathy or  attachment of the users?   3. Human involvement in AI systems      39
4 AI LIFECYCLE: AI SYSTEM  OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management4 AI LIFECYCLE: AI SYSTEM OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT   This section is focused on the analysis of the operations of the AI  system from the collection and structuring of data, based on a privacy  perspective by design or by default, to the processing of this data  through AI algorithms.        	 DATA	SOURCE 	 AND	MANAGEMENT The basic input of AI systems is data.  Most machine learning-based systems  (as opposed to rule-based systems)  require a large amount of high-quality  structured and historical data to refine  their behavior and results in predicting  and making automatic decisions. In this  sense, the quality of the data is of great  importance for the responsible use of AI,  as it is a way to guarantee the correct  operation of the system so that it does  not have biases or problems that affect  users (Posey 2019; WEF & IMDA 220). On the other hand, much of the data  used by AI systems usually contain  personal information or metadata  related to its users’ behavior, so the  protection of this data is another critical  element for the ethical and responsible  use of AI.4.1        41
4.1.1 Data type Before the deployment or adoption of  an AI system, an assessment should be  made of the type of data required for the  correct operation of the system and the  type of data available to feed it. Data is  currently an element that has acquired an  increasing commercial value so that its  exchange requires careful treatment not  to violate various aspects of user privacy  (MGI 2017). On the other hand, in recent  years, a dynamic of competitiveness  has been generated by data that users tend to protect more, such as their  geolocation and opinions or sentiment  around different products, services, or  topics, so that there is an awareness  growing on the care of these elements  that should be considered by those  companies interested in the use of this  type of data.  4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      42
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas it been precisely assessed  what type of data the AI  system will require, including its  availability, access to sources  and necessary formats? Are there measures to trace the  origin and destination of the  data used by the AI system? Is the data complete, up-todate and from reliable sources? Has the use of data extraction  methods such as ETL (extract,  transform, load) been  considered to ensure data and  format compatibility?Have quality control  evaluations been conducted on  the use of data from external  sources? Are there inventories or data  repositories, taxonomies, and  documentation of control  mechanisms over the data  based on the principles of data  governance of standardization  agencies such as ISO or IEEE? Are there monitoring  mechanisms that allow  assessing whether changes in  the source of origin generate  substantial changes in the AI  system’s results?Does the AI system use  specialized software tools  for data storage, retrieval,  or transformation to ensure  consistency? Some examples are: NoSQL or the MapReduce  model used by Apache Hadoop. Is there a team dedicated to  managing data policy? Does the company have the  ability to verify the validity and representativeness of the  data obtained through third  parties (including verification  strategies through metadata)?INVESTORSWhat is the source of the AI  system’s data, and what is the  data strategy? Does the company have its  data-generating source (single database), or does  it depend on third parties to  obtain it? Are there association  agreements with other  companies to guarantee  the maintenance of unique  databases not accessible to  competitors?Does the company use historical data, static data, or real-time data?  Does the company have the capacity to process training  data to make its algorithms  more efficient?ACCELERATORSAre technical experts available  to guide data architecture,  data collection, storage, and  transformation? Has it been assessed which are  the legal instruments that allow  processing the data for the AI  system? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      43
4.1.2 Data processing Data processing refers to collecting,  storing, organizing, structuring,  altering, consulting, using, transmitting,  disseminating, and any other operation  executed over this data (Omidyar  2019; WEF & IMDA 2020). It should be  remembered that various international  instruments prohibit, in principle, the  processing of data that reveals the  ethnic or racial origin of people, political  opinions, religious or philosophical  beliefs, affiliation or membership of  labor unions, genetic and biometric data,  sexual preference, or orientation, as well  as a state of health, except if conditions  are met in some instances, such as,  among others, the explicit consent of the user (EC 2018; General Data Protection  Regulation of the European Union 20162018). Therefore, it is recommended  that the appropriate instruments and  regulations be consulted according to  international and national regulations.  The guiding questions presented below  are mostly based on the provisions  contained in the General Data Protection  Regulation of the European Union, as one  of the most advanced instruments in this  matter. This instrument could offer inputs  for the elaboration of further regulations  in various countries. STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESIs the data collection process  part of data minimization  protocols that collect only  personal information from users  only when necessary and for  a limited time under secure  storage conditions? Have protocols been  established to process data  concerning storage, disclosure,  and transformation of  processing and its treatment by  third parties? Has an informed and disclosed  consent policy been established  on the use of users’ data?In the event of manual data  editing, are there sufficient  protocols to ensure the quality,  auditability, and traceability of  the modified data? Are there provisions to  safeguard the privacy of  personal information used  by the AI system, such as  aggregation and anonymity of data? Have the regulations around  security policies been  considered for limiting  personal data storage,  including protection against  unauthorized use, accidental  loss, destruction, or data  damage?What steps does the organization take to mitigate bias from pattern reinforcement? Has the development of an AI  model contrary to the original  system  been considered for  testing it and assessing the  reliability of the results? Does the organization fragment large databases to  mitigate risks and validate  the AI model from multiple  perspectives? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      44
4.1.3 Data integrity and confidentiality Data integrity assessment is closely  linked to data quality throughout the  chain of use within the AI system, as the  introduction of incomplete or poorly  structured data could have significant  repercussions on system performance.  The various data sets from which the  system is fed should be regularly tested  and well documented whether the data  was developed in-house or acquired  through a third party (General Data Protection Regulation of the European  Union 2016-2018; EC 2018). Besides using  the questions for guidance on this topic,  it is recommended that you review the  OECD privacy principles and consult the  respective ISO and IEEE standards. STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre procedures in place to  ensure data quality and  integrity?  Are the possible limitations  caused by the composition of  the data used recognized? Are wide margins of diversity  and representativeness of data  considered for users? Is there a possibility that the  user chooses to delete their  history and registry from the  system?Has the implementation of  tests that assess the integrity  of the data been considered?  For example: Database  Integrity Testing by service,  area, technology, or discipline.  How does the company verify  that the databases maintain  a consistent state or are not  accessed by third parties  improperly? Has the diversity and  representativeness of the  data been tested concerning  particular populations that  have reported problematic use cases?Are research methods and  technical tools used to improve  understanding of the data, its  dynamism, the AI model, and  performance? Has independent agency  certification been considered for data privacy and security? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      45
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESIn case of having databases  that include the users’ personal  information, what mechanisms  to protect this information  exist? Has the use of AI models  been considered to minimize  dependency on the use of  personal data? Have consent mechanisms  been established to use  personal data and the  possibility of withdrawing the  data if requested? Has it been considered in the  data processing and archiving  design that personal data is not retained for longer than  the time necessary for its use? Are personal data protection  impact assessments (PIA:  Privacy Impact Assessment)  carried out on products and  services linked to the AI system,  including personnel?Have data protection  measures been taken, such as  encryption, anonymization,  and aggregation? Are data protection protocols  from international standards  such as ISO or IEEE standards  followed? Is there a record of access to  personal data? For example:  who accesses, when, from what  location.In the event of the existence  of personnel assigned to the  supervision of personal data, has this officer been involved in the design of the system from the beginning? Are there mechanisms for  disclosing the data protection  policy that ensure its  knowledge by company  employees and third parties?INVESTORSEntities receiving financing or investment should know and follow the data privacy  policies of their counterparts.4.1.4 Privacy by design Access protocols should regulate the  handling of users’ data to use AI systems  to this data that determine precisely who  and under what circumstances they can  access said information. The company personnel that has access to it must  be duly accredited and qualified for its  treatment (KPMG, 2018 Galdon 2020,  Hoepman 2020). 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      46
4.1.5 Interoperability Interoperability refers to a system’s  ability to make processes and data  sources compatible with other providers  or customers (Galdon 2020), through  the use of similar formats that allow the  correct functioning of AI systems and  similar syntax between various databases.  However, on some occasions, this dimension is usually omitted. It is assumed  that the data from other institutions are  in compatible formats and with content  structured in the same way. However,  this is often a great challenge for many  systems’ operations, mostly syntactic  compatibility (Potgieter 2018). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas a mapping been carried  out of the sources with which  it is required to integrate the  AI system, including the type of  formats used and the readable  structure of the data? Who are the counterparts  (public or private sector)  with whom the operational  integration will be carried out? Is the conclusion of contracts  required for operational  integration? Has the collection of data been considered through  providers that comply with  data protection standards?Are details such as the physical location of servers  and databases known? What kind of process redesign  is required to integrate  external databases into the  workflow? Is there a possibility for the  user to obtain his data record to port it and use it  with another AI system?Have specific measures been  adopted to make the syntax and semantics of the data  sources compatible with the  particular requirements of each AI system? For example,  in the health sector through  resources similar to the Fast  Healthcare Interoperability  Resources (FHIR) in the United  States for the health sector.INVESTORSIs there a prior history of  the company’s operational  integration with the proposed  counterparties, including  contacts, contracts, or some  other link?Is the interoperability  relationship between the  company and its counterparts  sustainable?ACCELERATORSWhat analogous  interoperability initiatives can be developed and used?  For example, initiatives such as  smart cities or data lakes. 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      47
4.1.6 Testing and validation The testing and validation processes  allow identifying and resolving possible  errors in the AI system within a stable  environment. These trials require accurate databases that are as close to reality  as possible to guarantee the correct  functioning of the AI system (Galdon  2020; Omidyar 2019). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESDuring the trials’ design, are  the basic parameters for the  validations that allow us to  know the degree of reliability of the AI system determined? Are trials and validations  performed for each of the  subgroups of the target  population of the AI system? Do the tests carried out  correspond to the operational  expectations in the environment  in which the AI system will be  used? Are there different databases  to carry out differentiated  algorithm training, testing, and  validation activities? Are reproducibility tests  carried out in scale production  environments? Has the creation of a test  template been considered that  can have user feedback?Are simulations carried out on  collecting data from different  sources to ensure data quality  and verify its real world validity? Are tests carried out with  methods such as A/B on  different versions of the AI  model to verify its reliability?INVESTORSAre trial results shared with  funding entities, investors or  donors? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      48
	 MODEL	DEVELOPMENT:		 	 ALGORITHMS	 Algorithms are the structure of AI  systems, as they are in charge of  processing data to perform various  functions, including predictions,  clustering, categorization, and automated  decision-making (MGI 2017; Google  2018; IMDA & IDPC 2020). There are  several types of algorithms based on  rules or learning through big data.  Their classification may also include  the level of supervision or human  instruction they require. Due to their  conceptual complexity and high level of  mathematical abstraction, algorithms are  usually explained by the type of result  they generate, rather than by how their  internal processes act (Google 2018;  IMDA & IDPC 2020).  Based on the previous, building trust  around AI necessarily requires scrutiny of  the different algorithm models used and  their results. This section is a thematic guide on the most relevant topics around the algorithms’ ethical and  responsible use. 4.2.1 Traceability The traceability of the algorithms  used in artificial intelligence refers to  the documentation of the AI system’s  inputs and processes leading to certain  outcomes. This record is important, as it  is one of the elements that contribute to  transparency and confidence-building  around AI adoption. Besides, it allows to  accurately identify any problem that may  arise throughout complex operations from  data collection, structuring, processing,  interpretation, and the result (EC 2018;  Google 2018; WEF & IMDA 2020).4.2	 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      49
4.2.2 Explicability of AI processes and results Explicability the ability to clarify the  technical processes of an AI system  and the decisions that result from  the use of the system. An effective  explanation is one that is understandable  to the different audiences to whom it is  exposed. As AI systems have a greater  impact on people’s lives, the greater  their obligation to explain the processes and results of using AI. Likewise, the  concept of explicability has become  part of regulatory obligations that have  arisen from legal instruments such as the  General Data Protection Regulation of the  EU, and that has been incorporated into  various laws in Latin America (Google  2018; Dassen et al. 2019; Omidyar 2019;  Molnar 2020; WEF & IMDA 2020).STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre there ways to document  the following element: System objectives, data,  research approach, description  of the algorithm, and  performance evaluation  parameters, errors, and notes  from the technical team? Are there records on the  process of obtaining data from  open sources? Have documentation and  monitoring methods been  implemented for AI processes  based on pre-established rules  or self-learning?For AI systems based on preset  rules, has the model building  process been documented? For AI systems based on selflearning, is there a data source  tracking system that explains  the selection process and how  it happened?Regarding the methods of testing and validation of  algorithms: Does the company have  information about the data  used for testing and validation  for systems based on preestablished rules? Does the company have data tracing from various  sources and the results obtained from multiple  simulations for systems based on machine learning? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      50
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESTo what extent can the  processes and results of the AI system be easily  understood? Can the company explain why the system made a certain  prediction or decision so that  all users can understand it? Has the AI model been  designed considering different  interpretation factors including  language varieties?Suppose the results of  the AI system’s operation  have an impact on the  company’s decision-making.  Is it communicated on time  to the rest of the employees  and partners affected by the  decisions? Are there different models of  explanation corresponding to  the various features or actions  of the AI model? Has the construction of  simple explanatory narratives  been considered through  measurement parameters of  the type: high /medium/low,  percentages, or other tools that  help understand the system?Is there a document that explains to the public how the  AI system works, including  performance and maintenance  measurement parameters? Is there a simpler model of the AI system created to provide didactic explanations? Has the use of specialized  techniques been considered to explain the results of AI  models such as LIME, SHAP,  LOCO, PDP, ICE? Does the company have the  supplementary infrastructure to automatically and proactively offer explanations to users according to the  different predictions or decision-making results  generated by the AI system?INVESTORSWhat is the company’s business  model, and how does it  generate value through the use of AI?Has it been assessed to  what extent the AI model’s  interpretability can be  examined, and the model’s  work processes accessed to  understand them better?ACCELERATORSIs there an obligation to explain  the processes and results of  the AI system? And does the  company have the mechanisms  that allow these explanations? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      51
4.2.3 Replicability Replicability consists of the repeated  execution of an operation that generates  the same result consistently. For this  reason, some AI models substitute  certain measures of explicability by  demonstrating the consistency in  the results of a given model through  controlled repetitions. This occurs when  the AI model processes are usually very  complex or abstract in such a way that  understanding the system is simpler and  more useful to communicate the degree  of reliability of the system (EC 2018; Google 2018; Omidyar 2019; WEF & IMDA  2020). Furthermore, sometimes it is convenient  to carry out replicability tests to assess in  a counterfactual way how “fair” a system  is concerning different population groups,  avoiding the perpetuation of biases,  especially in sectors such as insurance,  loans, hiring, and law enforcement  predictively (Kusner et al. 2017). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESIs there a need to carry  out replicability tests and  counterfactual tests to ensure  that certain population groups  will not be negatively affected  by the AI system’s automated  decisions?Using replicability measures,  have exceptional results been  identified, and an assessment  made of how to address them? In the case of replicability tests,  are there updated data for  each test?Are comparative replicability  tests carried out between  different versions of the same AI model? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      52
4.2.4 Reproducibility The concept of reproducibility refers to  the AI model’s ability to be reproduced  in another environment external to that  of the organization that created it, unlike  the concept of replicability, which refers  to the possibility of obtaining the same results within of the same environment.  By definition, this concept requires two  environments in which tests are carried  out to verify the model (Google 2018;  Omidyar 2019; WEF & IMDA 2020). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas it been determined what  conditions are necessary to  guarantee the reproducibility of the system? Has any external organization  been contacted with whom  AI system reproducibility  activities could be carried out? Has a dedicated team been  engaged to review whether  similar results can be  produced using the same AI  models in different settings? Have the processes for testing  and verifying the reliability of  AI systems been documented  and operationalized?Has the development of  replicability files been  considered for behavioral testing phases of the AI system? Have communication  mechanisms been established to let users know the degree of reliability of the AI system  based on the reproducibility  tests’ results?INVESTORSIs the company the developer  of its own AI system, or does  it depend on an external  developer to replicate and test  results? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      53
4.2.5 Auditability The auditability of AI systems is usually  reserved for particular cases in which  a third party assesses the algorithms’  processes and results. In this sense, the  AI models that could have a greater  propensity to be audited are those that  could have an impact on human rights  or the safety of people. Although it is  a concept whose application is limited, it is convenient to consider some  preparatory aspects that facilitate the  process of collecting and structuring  information in case an audit is required  (General Data Protection Regulation of  the European Union 2016-2018). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHave mechanisms been  established to facilitate the  auditability of the system?  For example, through the  documentation and traceability  of processes and results.  Have you considered how  commercially sensitive  information should be shared  in the event of an audit?In cases where the AI system  has implications for user safety,  could it be independently  audited?Does the company have  certifications from  international standardizing  agencies, which facilitate  documentation delivery to  auditing bodies?INVESTORSIs the company responsible for data processing, facilitating  the traceability of data flows? Is there a periodic report on  the application of governance  codes to investors?Are the company’s business  practices such as transactions,  acquisition of licenses, or other  agreements aligned with the  ethical principles of data  processing? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      54
4.2.6 Maintenance AI systems require periodic maintenance to have up-to-date data to allow efficient operation (EC 2018;  Galdon 2020; WEF & IMDA 2020). STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre periodic reviews and  updates of the databases  carried out to ensure their  accuracy, validity, and  relevance? Have specialized personnel  been dedicated to the periodic  review and update of the data  and algorithms?Has the use of automatic  notification systems been  contemplated on the  availability of new data  relevant to the AI system? Have systems been verified to  behave unexpectedly in certain  contexts?Are various alternative models of the AI system used to validate its operability  concerning the different elements or types of processed  data to mitigate the system’s  bias? 4. AI Lifecycle: AI System Operations Management      55
5 RELATIONSHIP WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS 
5. Relationship with key stakeholders 5 RELATIONSHIP WITH KEY STAKEHOLDERS    Stakeholder engagement refers broadly to the involvement of  relevant stakeholders throughout the AI lifecycle, which includes  communications, collaboration, consultation, and accountability  with information owners, users, clients, investors, partners, suppliers,  regulators, and civil society in general (EC 2018; Omidyar 2019; WEF & IMDA 2020).       57
	 																																															 	 TRANSPARENCY5.1	 STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESHas the organization  contemplated and designed  communication pieces aimed  at the different actors involved  with the AI system or affected  in some way by it? Has the organization assessed  and designed communication  pieces based on scenarios in  which an explanation of the AI  system’s operation or results  would be necessary?Has the creation of an  explanation strategy been  considered based on data,  models, human elements,  interferences, impact, etc.? Has the progressivity of using  the AI system by different  audiences been taken into  consideration to avoid  communications fatigue? Does qualified personnel  supervise the communication  and feedback channels?Has various tools and audiovisual media been  considered to improve the  communication strategy on the AI system? In those moments in which the explanation of the AI system’s operations is not useful, has the use of  counterfactual explanation  techniques based on  replicability tests been  considered? INVESTORSDoes the company have a  policy of accountability and  transparency or similar to its  clients and partners?Does the company efficiently  communicate the results  of impact evaluations on  protecting its clients’ data, if  necessary? Especially if the AI  system carries out automated  decision-making tasks that have  an impact on customers 5. Relationship with key stakeholders      58
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre users notified that they are interacting with an AI  system, and what implications  does it have, before starting the  interaction, for example, with  chatbots? Are users informed about  the reason for using this  technology, and what specific  functionalities are linked to AI? Is the expectation and extent of the behavior of the AI system communicated to the user? Is there a possibility that the  user chooses to exit the system  and delete all their data?In addition to text-based  communication tools, are  there infographics and other  multimedia tools that allow the  public to understand how the  AI system works? For some instances: Once a  result or a decision derived  from the AI system is  generated, are factors that  led to that result explained to  the user? Especially in cases of  granting loans, government aid,  or insurance coverage. Are there means of  communication through which  the user can request a review  of the result of the AI system  that has affected them in any  way?Is there an explanation policy  that includes the various cases  in which additional information  must be offered to users? Are there pedagogical tools  and workshops that allow  clients to have a better level of  understanding and interaction  with the company about the  behavior of the AI system? In using chatbots for customer  relations, is there a method of  recording the conversation, for  purposes of improvement and  learning only?	 CONSUMERS	AND 	 USERS	OF	THE	SYSTEM5.2	 5. Relationship with key stakeholders      59
	 ACCESS	TO 	 FINANCING   Access to financing for projects related  to AI is the result of a match between  the capital fund interest and the startup. It is a process of building trust  and mutual selection based on the  exchange of information to reduce the  knowledge gap between both parties  about AI applications and the return on  investment. It is crucial to have accurate  communication about the scope and  limitations of the AI system, and even  tools that are not properly AI, but which  manage large amounts of data. Similarly, teams looking for funding  rounds must include a balance of  business professionals, industry experts,  and data scientists who can offer a  complete and robust view of the solution  being presented (EC 2018; Gonfalonieri,  2019). 5.3	 5. Relationship with key stakeholders      60
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESIs the use of AI being promoted as the best tool to  solve the problem posed? Is there a simple and  straightforward narrative that  links the identification of  problems and the solutions  that the AI system will offer  with the corporate strategy  to identify niche markets,  competitors, and SWOT? Is the type of AI system  or proprietary technology  used being communicated  accurately and transparently,  even if it is just a large data  processing system? Automated tasks and data  analysis are sometimes  confused with the aspiration  to use these tools to carry out  autonomous and intelligent  predictions or decision-making  as AI systems do. Does the company’s pitch focus on showing the  added value and ease of  implementing the solution  beyond focusing on using a  specific AI model? Does the company have a  diverse and balanced team of professionals in business,  data science, marketing,  distribution, sales, and industry  specialists? What type of guarantee clauses does the fund offer to protect your investment  and is it feasible/acceptable to  comply with them?Has the AI system been piloted  with incipient indicators that  show its ability to be deployed  in the market?  Which key performance  indicators (KPIs) are in place  to communicate the robustness  of the AI model? What is the relationship  strategy with strategic  partners within the value  chain?  Are elements communicated  that show the possibility of  scalability of the business  model, including “go to  market” strategies?Does the company have  indicators that allow  transmitting the interest  and validation of clients that  justify the return on software  investment as a service (SaaS)  versus other digital solutions? 5. Relationship with key stakeholders      61
INVESTORSIn case of not having an actual  AI system, but a big data  management system that in the short or medium term might evolve into an AI model,  what is the progressive level of human intervention? What track record does the  company have in using AI for  real-world solutions and what  have been their returns on  investment? How dependent are the  solutions on obtaining  intellectual property rights on AI data and models if  you don’t have your own  technology?Does the company have the ability to become a  segment leader and dominate its market? For products aimed at  consumers/user, does the AI  system uses the data provided  by the user to create greater  personalization and link with  the service?What is the level of social  impact that the company has  had by using its AI solution, and how sustainable is its  return on investment? 5. Relationship with key stakeholders      62
6 COMMUNICATIONS
6. Communications6 COMMUNICATIONS   Companies that make use of AI systems should carry out proactive,  transparent, and systematic communications to stakeholders about the  capabilities and limitations of AI systems. In this sense, it is important to  manage expectations about the technological scope of the AI solution  (Omidyar 2019; Engler 2020; WEF & IMDA 2020).      64
STAGE I STAGE II STAGE IIICOMPANIESAre the terms of service  offered by the AI system  communicated? Are there appropriate  communications channels to  explain the user it is interacting  with an AI system? Have alternatives for  interaction with human beings  been offered? Have mechanisms for receiving feedback from end-users of the system been established? Have communication channels,  procedures, and contact  points been shared to resolve  problems and questions about  the AI system? Have interested parties,  including shareholders and  users, been communicated  about previously identified or  perceived biases or errors? Has any mechanism been  considered to involve  stakeholders in the  development or feedback of  the AI system? Has the adoption of AI  been communicated within  the company, including  possibly affected workers and  representatives?Have various scenarios  been considered on which  certain critical operations  of the AI system should be  communicated? Has the possibility that  explanations run the risk  of generating confusion,  confirmation bias, or cognitive  fatigue of audiences has been  considered? Has a taxonomy or glossary  been developed to clarify  concepts such as “fairness”  regarding the AI system? Is there a metric or parameter for determining concepts such as “fairness” in the use of  the AI system?ACCELERATORSIs it possible or necessary  to determine the degree  of understanding of the  counterparts on the AI system’s terms of service?  6. Communications      65
ANNEX 1
The main component determining the  stages is the level of development of  the ventures, including the seed and  early stages in stage I, start-ups in series  A and B in stage II, and start-ups in  series C and corporations in stage III.  In turn, this usually corresponds to the  level of technological development that  enterprises have reached, according  to the nine TRL levels of the European  Commission, categorized into three  levels: research, development, and deployment. Finally, it should be noted  that each stage entails a different  interaction between actors; thus,  incubators usually operate in stages I and  II, while accelerators could take a more  active role in stage III.ANNEX 1 DESCRIPTION OF THE STAGES OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT   To cover the broadest possible spectrum of entrepreneurs and sectors  that make use or intend to incorporate artificial intelligence into their  business, this matrix develops three stages of development for the  self-assessment of the ethical and responsible use of AI. These stages  give the self-assessment its progressive condition since the evaluations  change according to the level of development of the enterprise  (Churchill and Lewis 1983; Dibner 2018; Areitio 2019), the level of TRL  (European Commission 2014-2015), and the participation of different  actors in the various stages.  Annex 1      67
DETERMINANTS  OF STAGESSTAGE I STAGE II STAGE III Development level of the  start up * Based on the  conceptualization of  Harvard Business Review,  Medium, Mattermark,  Crunchbase, The Venture  City.Seed/early stage Product ideation and  development. Arrival to the first users  and market discovery. First hires.  Preparing for Series A Alistamiento Serie ALater stage Startups in Series A and  B + Bridge rounds. Series A Business model definition. Start of product or  service distribution on a  larger scale. Series B Commercial traction with  clients and well-defined  business model. Scale business  model, user base and  acquisitions.Mature C series startups and  corporations. Series C Acquisition of greater  capital and accelerated  growth. Identification of  profitability, but with the  need for more capital. Internationalization. More acquisitions and  hiring. Corporations Greater consolidation in the market and  profitability. Tech Readiness Level  (TRL)  *Based on Tech Readiness  Levels developed by the  European Commission  2014-2015. Research Level 1 - Observed and  reported basic principles.   Level 2 - Concept and  technological application  formulated.  Level 3 - Experimental  proof of concept. Development Level 4 - Validation of  components and layout in  a laboratory environment.   Level 5 - Assessment  of component and  arrangement in a relevant  environment.  Level 6 - Prototype  demonstration in a  relevant environment. Deployment Level 7 - Demonstration of a system prototype in  an operating environment.  Level 8 - Complete system and certified  through tests and  demonstrations.  Level 9 - System  successfully tested in a  real environment.  Engaged Actors Entrepreneur Investor IncubatorEntrepreneur Investor Incubator/AcceleratorEntrepreneur Investor Annex 1      68
Areitio, Andy (2019). From idea to scale up:  Phases of a start up. Medium. The Venture City.  https:/ /medium.com/theventurecity/fases-de-lastartup-de-idea-a-scale-up-73c8e81cd37 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) (2020).   Ethical and responsible adoption of Artificial  Intelligence in Latin America and the Caribbean. Bartram, Robert (2018). The New Frontier for  Artificial Intelligence. ISO Committee on Artificial Intelligence. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42.  https:/ /www.iso.org/news/ref2336.html Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at  Harvard University (2020). Principled Artificial Intelligence. A Map of Ethical and Rights-Based  Approaches to Principles for AI. Cabrol, Marcelo; Baeza-Yates, Ricardo; González  Alarcón, Natalia; Pombo, Cristina (2020). Is data privacy the price we must pay to survive a  pandemic? Inter-American Development Bank. http:/ /dx.doi.org/10.18235/0002292. https:/ /publications.iadb.org/es/es-la-privacidadde-los-datos-el-precio-que-debemos-pagar-par a-sobrevivir-una-pandemia Churchill, Neil C. & Lewis, Virginia L. (1983). The Five Stages of Small Business Growth.  Harvard Business Review. May 1983 Issue.   https:/ /hbr.org/1983/05/the-five-stages-of-smallbusiness-growth European Commission (2018). Ethical Guidelines  for a Reliable AI. Independent Group of High Level  Experts on Artificial Intelligence. Dassen, Thommy; Hou, Naiwen; Kronseder,  Veronika (2019). Chapter 2. Introduction to Partial Dependence Plots (PDP) and Individual  Conditional Expectation (ICE). https:/ /compstat-lmu.github.io/iml_methods_ limitations/pdp.html Dibner, Gil (2018). There are only three  startup stages. Medium. Angular Ventures. https:/ /medium.com/angularventures/there-areonly-three-stages-for-startups-b8783d6b0f1Engler, Alex (2020). The Case for AI Transparency  Requirements. Brookings Institution. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/the-case-forai-transparency-requirements/ European Commission (EC) (2014-2015).  Technology Readiness Levels. Horizon 2020 Work  Programme 2014-2015. Annex. https:/ /ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ ref/h2020/wp/2014_2015/annexes/h2020-wp 1415-annex-g-trl_en.pdf _________ (2018). Trustworthy AI Assessment  List. Independent High Level Expert Group on  Artificial Intelligence. European Parliament Research Service (2019).  A Governance Framework for Algorithmic  Accountability and Transparency. https:/ /www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/ STUD/2019/624262/EPRS_STU(2019)624262_ EN.pdf European Union (2019). Annual Report 2019.  European Data Protection Supervisor. Everis & Endeavor (2018). The impact of Artificial  Intelligence on entrepreneurship.  http:/ /www.endeavor.cl/wp-content/uploads/Elimpacto-de-la-IA-en-el-emprendimiento-en-A m%C3%A9rica-Latina-everis-y-Endeavor.pdf Galdon, Gemma (2020). Ethical Evaluations  Protocol. Ethics Consulting. Gigler, Bjorn-Soren (2020). Closing The  Investment Gap For Artificial Intelligence And  Blockchain In Europe. Panodissey. https:/ /panodyssey.com/en/article/ entrepreneurship/forging-new-frontiers-infinance-for-digital-innovations-m4qcv3ktj9ft Gonfalonieri, Alexandre (2019). How to get  Funding for AI Startups. KDnuggets. https:/ /www.kdnuggets.com/2019/06/funding-aistartups.html González Alarcón, Natalia; Pombo, Cristina  (2020). How can artificial intelligence help in a  pandemic?. Inter-American Development BankSOURCES      69
http:/ /dx.doi.org/10.18235/0002300. https:/ /publications.iadb.org/es/como-puede-lainteligencia-artificial-ayudar-en-una-pandemia Google (2018). Whitepaper: Perspectives on  Issues in AI Governance. Hoepman, Jaap-Henk (2020). Privacy Design  Strategies (The Little Blue Book). Computing  Science Department. Radboud University. https:/ /www.cs.ru.nl/~jhh/publications/pdsbooklet.pdf IEEE P7000TM Standards. Infocomm Media Development Authority  and Personal Data Protection Commission,  Singapore (IMDA & IDPC) (2020). Model Artificial  Intelligence Governance Framework. Second Edition. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42 Artificial intelligence. KPMG (2018). The importance of the Privacy  Impact Assessment (PIA) in data protection.  https:/ /www.tendencias.kpmg.es/2018/01/laimportancia-de-los-privacy-impact-assessment-pi a-en-la-proteccion-de-datos/ Kusner, Matt; Loftus, Joshua; Russell, Chris &  Silva, Ricardo (2017). Counterfactual Fairness.  Neural Information Processing Systems. https:/ /papers.nips.cc/paper/6995-counterfactualfairness.pdf Lewis, Barnaby (2019). Standards Cooperation is  Key to Making AI and Smart Cities a Reality. ISO Committee on Artificial Intelligence. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42. https:/ /www.iso.org/news/ref2381.html Lockett, Kath (2019). Embracing the Power  of Technology. ISO Committee on Artificial  Intelligence. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42. https:/ /www.iso.org/news/ref2451.html MacCarthy, Mark (2020). AI needs more  regulation not less. Brookings Institution. https:/ /www.brookings.edu/research/ai-needsmore-regulation-not-less/ McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) (2017). Artificial Intelligence: The Next Digital Frontier?.  Discussion Paper. Méndez, Manuel Ángel (2020). The Government  Joins a Questioned Digital Tracking Initiative: “It’s  a Trojan Horse.” Confidential. Apps. https:/ /www.elconfidencial.com/ tecnologia/2020-04-17/gobierno-apps-rastreopepp-pt-dp3t-coronavirus_2553776/ Molnar, Cristoph (2020). Interpretable Machine  Learning: A Guide for Making Blackbox Models Explainable. https:/ /christophm.github.io/ interpretable-ml-book/ Official Journal of the European Union (20162018). General Data Protection Regulation  2016/679. Omidyar Network (2019). Due -Diligence  Checklist for Privacy-Aware Investing. Race to the  Top Initiative. _________ (2019). Progression Matrix. Race to the  Top Initiative. _________ (2019). The Emerging Market in Digital  Trust: New Obligations and New Opportunities for Venture Capital. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development (2018). Private Equity Investment in  Artificial Intelligence. _________ (2019). OECD Principles on Artificial  Intelligence. https:/ /legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/ OECD-LEGAL-0449 European Parliament (2016). General Data  Protection Regulation.  https:/ /eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ES/TXT/ PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=es Posey, Luke (2019). Intro to AI Ethics. Towards  Data Science. https:/ /towardsdatascience.com/intro-to-aiethics-2a31fbbe6e87 Potgieter, Luke (2018). Semantic Interoperability:  Are you training your AI by mixing data sources  that look the same but aren’t?. KDnuggets. https:/ /www.kdnuggets.com/2018/10/semanticinteroperability-training-ai-mixing-different-datasources.html Szramke, Tomasz (2017). Types of AI Algorithms.  Growly. https:/ /www.growly.io/types-of-aialgorithms/ World Economic Forum in collaboration with  the Info-communications Media Development  Authority of Singapore (WEF & IMDA) (2020).       70
Companion to the Model AI governance  Framework - Implementation and Self-Assessment  Guide for Organizations. Wright, Ray (2019). Interpreting Black  Box Machine Learning Models Using Partial  Dependence (PDP) and Individual Conditional  Expectation (ICE) Plots. SAS Institute. https:/ /www.sas.com/content/dam/SAS/support/ en/sas-global-forum-proceedings/2018/19502018.pdf      71
