                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MIT Schwarzman College of Computing Task Force  Workin g Group on Socia l Implication s and Responsibilitie s of Computing  Fina l Report  Julie A. Sha h an d Meliss a Nobles , Co-Chairs  Augu st 5, 2019  OVERVIEW  As computin g increasing ly affec ts ever y aspec t of socie ty, the fie ld of compute r scienc e is becoming  responsibl e for a growin g numbe r of system s tha t affec t the balanc e betwee n individua l righ ts vs.  the commo n good , privac y vs. openness , efficienc y vs. explainabili ty, and traditiona l vs. emerging  form s of wor k. We hav e an opportuni ty to addre ss the se emergin g challenge s by transforming  compute r scienc e into somethin g fundamentall y new . It is a crossroad s simila r to th e momen t in  the 1950 s whe n MI T create d th e fie ld of engineerin g scienc e from engineering.  MIT ha s a distinc t opportuni ty to refashio n computing , with societal , ethica l, and policy  consideration s wove n into its conception , by creatin g a comprehensive , world-leadin g experience  dedicate d to:  •Developing and advancing research into fundamental issues of computation . •Training students to analyze and articulate the challenges that computing creates and/or influences . •Designing and building the policy and technical solutions of the future . Throughout our internal and external scan, our working group was struck by 1) the enormous  potential and need to aggressively address and incorporate research and teaching on the societal  implications of computing and 2) the profound cultural and structura l inertia and , at times , barriers  preventing precisely this kind of work at MIT and elsewhere. Integrating ethical, social, and policy  analysis into the core of the Schwarzman College of Computing ( SCoC )—and into MIT’s vision for  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              the future of computing —is not a question of tweaking around the edges . It will require sustained  vision and dedicated investment in:  •Fostering new research and scholarship methods . •Championing students and faculty engaged with these topics , which are traditionally les s integrated in computer science . •Weaving this vision into the heart of MIT’s core mission . GUIDING PRINCIPLES  Habits of Mind and Action  Curricular approaches should be dedicate d to the creation of habits of mind and habits of action  and to foster ing the development of those habits among students, challenging them with continual  opportunity to critically evaluate and reflect on the societal implications of their work. With these  habits of mind and action, students will learn to design systems that meet the needs of societies  around the world and lead public consideration of how to address the many challenge s and  opportunities computing brings to society . The SCoC will n eed to build a range of new methods and  spaces to develop language and modes of thought to articulate these issues.  Integrating Ethical, Social, and Policy Analysis to Construct Solutions  As a leading engineering institution with world -class social scie nce and humanities and a tradition  of multidisciplinary collaboration, MIT has a pivotal opportunity to make leadership contributions  to the social, ethical , and policy challenges facing the world by integrating consideration of these  issues with the development of new computing technologies. Establishing and prioritizing  interdisciplinary structures , which include rigorous methodologies derived from the liberal arts,  humanities, social sciences, and other disciplines, will prove critical in activating and sustaining  habits of mind and action. The SCoC must serve as a catalyst in facilitating complex interdisciplinary  actions.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Reach Everyone : Ecology of Diverse Courses and Learning Opportunities to Inspire  Experimentation  A successful approach to teaching the societal implications of computing should :  •Engage every student in a substantive way . •Offer a range of avenues for ethical exploration . •Foster in -depth research and scholarship . •Cultivate a culture a nd spirit of experimentation . Prioritization of Collaborative Spaces  To instill the desired habits of mind and action and collaboration, it is essential that scholars of the  social implications of computing, including those who are not computer scientists, have physical  and intellectual collaborative spaces within the SCoC .  POSSIBLE UNSUCCESSFUL FUTURES  In addition to envisioning our goals, the working group thought through possible unsuccessful  futures. Fundamental challenges, risks, and barriers exist within the MIT community that must be  addressed (with both short -term and long -term perspectives ) to ac hieve success with this  endeavor. Our group identified the following examples of future situations that would fall short of  achieving our desired goals:  •Incorporation of ethical and societal perspectives into education and research is conceived of as a s ervice that is delegated to, and provided by, a unit outside the SCoC or is realized in a manner that is perceived as lower prestige within the SCoC and wider MIT community. •Our efforts spur the development of a new discipline/practice that fails to achiev e the SCoC’s intended interdisciplinary and collaborative vision —for example, a siloed discipline focused on the scholarly study of the societal and ethical implications of computing without reach across our educational and research missions. •We remain in our current state —societal and ethical considerations remain peripheral to the work of the SCoC . MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CONSTITUENCIES  Core to our success is acknowledging tha t no one institution, organizati on, or discipline currently  possesses full insight into the systems needed for the future nor fully understands the wide range of  societal needs. As a result, we embrace an approach of extensive collaborations, both within MIT  and beyond, to achieve excellenc e and to help lead such collaborations. The contributions and  needs of the following constituencies, among others, are integral to our efforts :  •Employers are eager for students who possess strong critical -thinking habits of mind and who have developed reflective practices and intellectual skills bridging computing , humanities , and social science . Across sectors, ranging from Silicon Valley technology companies to public interest organizations, employers have emphasized the need for graduates who have the robust tools and vocabulary to evaluate the societal consequences of technological choices. •Policymakers, regulators , and public interest groups look to universities to develop the next stage of computation capabilities and are looking to MIT to fill the current gap in policy research, guidance, and leadership. They view MIT as responsible for training future policymakers and emphasize the urgency of these issues . •Researchers across disciplines, including many of our own students, are very excite d about new areas of research within computing , including questions regarding accountability and explainability that cross disciplines . They worry that peer institutions are working more diligently than MIT is to capture these budding areas. •MIT faculty and students are excited about the broad commitment to ethics and societal challenges but worry that it will require new investments and a need to prioritize curriculum that will result in difficult trade -off decisions. They speak of peers and supervisors who see policy and/or ethics as a distraction from the real work. DEFINING OUR TERMS: ETHICS, SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS , AND POLICY  In  considering  the  social implications and  responsibilities of  computing, we  identify  three  broad   analytic  frames:  ethics, societal implications,  and  policy.  Each  brings different intellectual  background, research  methods,  and  educational approaches. We  offer  a working  understanding  of   MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               how each frame may apply to the SCoC’s mission in research and education . The wide ranging  impact of computing on society necessarily motivates the study of ethics, societal implications and  policy on a range of issues, from inequality, the future of work, and innovation, to political  discourse, national security, and privacy. We also offer an illustrative example of how these  different habits of mind and action inform the consideration of one among many leading challenge s  in computing: privacy .  Ethics  Drawing on moral philosophy , ethics guides us in determining what is the right or just course of  action for individuals, groups , organizations , or society at large. In considering privacy questions,  ethics can help us under stand whether a particular use of personal data is proper, whether an  individual engineer ought to partici pate in the design of a system that raise s privacy risk, and how  privacy law ought to consider allowing or prohibiting the use of personal data where it puts human  dignity at risk .  Societal Implications  Many fields of social science —from history of technology, to sociology and anthropology, to  economics and political science, just to name a few —can help illuminate the past and potential  effects of computing technology on individuals , organizations, and society . All these disciplines have  much to teach about the implications of computing for privacy, both with respect to the lives of  individuals and the broader collective effect of intensive collection and use of personal data. How  will individual participation in society change with different privacy rules? How will market  mechanisms govern use of personal data? How do different system designs change user’s privacy  perceptions and choices?  Policy  Policymakers, computer systems designers , and scholars of the ethical and societal implications of  computing depend on one an other in many respects . Policymakers will look to the research  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 5 
                                                                                                                                 produced at the SCoC for guidance . And the SCoC can train the next generation of leaders in  computing to :  • Take policy needs into account when designing systems .  • Contribut e to the development of well -informed policy frameworks that govern plans, rules ,  laws , and methods of computing .  • Develop new techniques enabling systems to meet society’s requirements as expressed in  law and policy .  Policymakers will look to social scientists who study computing for insights of use to the  policymaking process. In the complex task of developing and implementing privacy laws, the SCoC  can contribute :  • Systems that meet privacy policy needs .  • Social science that informs the privacy legislation choices made b y law makers .  • Guidance to companies that face the increasingly complex task of meeting society’s privacy  expectations .  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KEY IDEAS  The transformation of MIT through the SCoC represents a n unprecedented opportunity to coevolve  new educational and research approach es to meet the challenges that accompany emerging  computing technology. Starting with —but not limited to —the SCoC, MIT is po sitioned to pioneer a  new approach to engineering education and research that prepares our engineers and scientists to  analyze and articulate societal and ethical considerations, as well as to pursue cross -disciplinary  approaches to developing both policy and technical solutions. This holistic approach gives MIT a  distinct advantage over other universities where efforts focus primarily on either research  initiatives or cross -disciplinary curricular approaches for undergraduates . That includes those  institut ions that link curriculum and research around one problem space , such as ethical challenges ,  societal challenges, or policy challenges and solutions.  The SCoC will intellectually enrich us all —existing faculty and educators, new cross -disciplinary  research and teaching staff, and graduate and undergraduate students. The success of MIT’s effort  will be demonstrated by its ability to close the cross -cultural vocabulary gap, develop a share d  understanding among disciplines, and create further depth and scope for the emerging use of  computer science in research and education.  POTENTIAL STRUCTURES AND FRAMEWORKS  A combination of top -down, center -out, and bottom -up approaches are required to create a durable  structure. The top -down and center -out approaches are institutionally created to (1) prioritize our  values structure and (2) serve as a catalyst by facilitating and nurturing ongoing collaborations. The  bottom -up approach is organic by nature, resulting from collaborative efforts initiated by faculty  and students. Our analysis indicates that the majority of successful efforts arise from bottom -up  efforts that are then ultimately sustained and nurtured by departmental faculty.  Extrapolating lessons learned from best practices across a wide range of fields, our working group  identified the need for malleable structures, processes, and incentives to ena ble short -term impact  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         while building towards a long -term vision. To ensure that we capture the collective understanding  developed through this process, we have aggregated here a list of potential options that could be  activated to bring the SCoC’s vision t o fruition.  TOP -DOWN CONSIDERATIONS  Institutional Commitment, Alignment, and Prioritization  •Develop any a pproach as a live field of study and research ; prioritiz e it as a critical component of MIT’s values structure . •Pioneer and operationalize as a working model through a plurality of approaches that leverage MIT’s distinctive strengths. The advantage of integrating various disciplines lies in the diverse methods they offer to think, ask, listen, analyze, and address problems ; inclusion of disciplines and practices can’t appear as bolt ed-on. •Prioritize ethical, policy, and societal considerations ; cultivate a culture in which faculty and students who focus on these con siderations are empowered and positively recognized by the scholarly community for developing these habits of mind and action. •Develop heightened awareness of system -wide issues that currently dissuade adoption of integrated structures and models (e.g. , [dis]incentives on tenure track) . •Incorporate various design methodologies and practices (value -sensitive design, human centered design, etc.) to ensure that ethical, policy, and societal considerations are deeply embedded in technology conception and develo pment. •Empower the new dean with a specified number of faculty appointments to (1) expedite the desired vision of the SCoC and (2) achieve interdisciplinary hiring and promotion . •Secure investment to foster the longer -term nature of this transition. Structures  •Consider creating a dedicated unit centered on ethical, societal , and policy considerations that brings together internal and external scholars, perhaps for year -long residencies or longer terms, and includes practitioners from industry and public interest organizations to collaborate on real -world issues. MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  • Consider c reating permanent public engagement constructs with numerous constituencies ;  consider a funded center with government, industry, broader civil society, etc.  • Develop an incubator to empower groups of faculty and students from diverse disciplines to  engage on topics with unknown lifespans (5 –10 years) prior to establishing a new unit in  the SCoC . Example: Data Science Commons at UC Berkeley .  Faculty, Staff Hiring, and Development  • Inclu de tasks/records/clarification s to ensure social, ethical, and policy considerations are  prioritized during the faculty hiring process (similar to existing processes for female and  under -represented minority candidates ).  • Foster an environment that ensures that interdisciplinary faculty enjoy equivalent  privileges to those of traditional tenured faculty. Example: career progression and  promotion opportunities, approval of PhD students, etc.  • Develop innovative approaches to link academic disciplines with practical applications to  bring an interdisciplinary approach to fruition. Examples: (1) faculty members with  nontraditional academic careers to serve as catalyst s (Stanford) and (2) the clinical  education model in law in which faculty work on case studies and practical applications that  are analogous to MIT Professors of Practice.  • Consider deploying and supporting interdisciplinary faculty across departments .  • Develop innovative ways to scale while appropriately supporting faculty and students.  Examples : (1) Develop a stable research staff that work s on policy, ethics, and social  considerations with a full or partial course load year -round . (2) Leverage graduate students  and postdoctoral researchers from diverse student populations for curriculum creation, (3)  Engage the undergraduate community in TA opportunities (i.e. , UC Berkeley model) (4)  Leverage existing resources currently serving a cross -functional role, e.g., MIT Libraries ’  successful efforts to incorporate diversity, inclusion, and social justice into the Libraries'  educational and research mission.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Curricular Investment  Current Landscape  • At MIT’s peer institutions, we see an increasing effort to add an ethics or social science  element to existing computer science classes. For example, the Harvard EthiCS curriculum  relies on graduate students in philosophy to teach ethics modules within many CS classes.  • Several classes in SOE and many in SHASS directly address the ethical, cultural, and policy  questions raised by developments in computing. MIT NEET (New Engineering Education  Transformation) is developing an ethical engineering curriculum drawing on the recent  work of a philosophy postdoc and MIT Media Lab graduate student. MIT SEE (Society,  Ethics, and Engineering) teaches ethics for engineers to more than 10% of MIT  undergraduates and has a course version focusing on the ethical issues in CS/AI.  • Our peer i nstitutions (e.g., Stanford, UC Berkeley) offer large interdisciplinary classes  co-taught by faculty from differen t departments (e.g., Stanford: Computers, Ethics, and  Policy ).  • MIT has experimented successfully in teaching partnerships with leading law schools  (Georgetown and Harvard) enriching our student body, creating research collaborations  across disciplines, and helping our peer institutions to bring deeper technical perspective to  their scholarship.  Potential Pathways for MIT Going Forward  • Catalyze and sustain undergraduate classes with embedded ethics and societal  considerations .  o Currently at MIT, some professors working on computing voluntarily add material  that touches on the ethical and societal implications of the course content; however,  there exists no systematic source of supp ort for this work. Instructors frequently  feel, reasonably, that these questions are in opposition to their content objectives.  Instructors often are disconnected from the cutting -edge research on the social  implications of computing. It’s essential that we find innovative ways to scale up  embedded ethics /social science .  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o The ways the current communications requirement is embedded in the  undergraduate curriculum provides a potential model for embedded ethics /social  science , as many recognize that these concerns extend far beyond computing.  o We consider the embedded e thics /social science model far better at advancing the  SCoC’s mission than one stand -alone ethics c lass, required or optional.  • Creat e new first -year big -idea classes that introduce students to the issues of ethics, societal  implications, policy, and computing.  • Develop SHASS concentrations that address societal implications of computing and  technology.  • Develop SCoC concentrations that address the ethical and societal implications of  computing and technology.  • Develop certificate programs for undergraduates and graduate students, which are highly  marketable for employment.  • Requir e all UROPs to engage wit h these issues and questions (e.g. , within their proposals or  via a final report), and/or creat e UROPs focused on ethical and societal considerations .  o A critical component of learning for almost all students, undergrad uate and  graduate , is through mentored research, such as UROPs, thes es, research  assistantships, externships, etc. Neither UROP program s nor classes foreground  professionalization of students as ethical actors. ( Example s: MIT Political Science:  Preparation for Travel Abroad in Dangerous Countries . From SA+P : Thinking About  the Needs of the Client from the Beginning and Reiterative Process of External  Critique .)  • Encourage and incentivize the development of new collaborative courses and research  projects conducted jointly wit h peer institutions such as law schools (e.g. , in the model of  current joint courses with Georgetown Law School).  • Consider expanding the graduate student experience to include mandatory component s  based on topics of interest ; students attend lectures in other fields, TA, critiqu e papers , do  resear ch, develop mini -courses, participate in IAP, etc.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 11 
                                                                                                                                                                                              Physical Space  • Consider designation/renovation of a number of spaces across campus where different  cohorts meet longitudinally (faculty, fellows, TAs, project teams) to build communities and  maintain visibility of efforts across campus. Physical continuity and adjacency are critical to  fostering ongoing collaboration. Intentionality is needed regarding the design of how we  work, live, and collaborate.  o Examples: lounges, coffee machines, white boards, spaces to ready/study, shared  offices, flexible/temporary workplaces .  Moonshot Ideas  Pursu e moonshot ideas by launching large projects that highlight the work MIT aims to do.  Examples: small scale –$50K Bose Competition, MIT $100K Competition; large scale –MacArthur  Foundation’s $100M and Change . Example: A topic related to work of the future .  CENTER -OUT CONSIDERATION  Continuum Approach to Reflect Broader Aspirations  • Bridge education and research efforts to foster habits of mind and action across a  continuum: (1) At the individual actor level: values in design and practice and how a  designer should be guided by ethics and responsible design in making system design  decisions such as choosing algorithm features . (2) Psychology and sociology: consideration  of how technology interacts with people as individuals, in groups , and institutions . (3)  Policy, economics, environmental impact , and sustainability : understanding power  dynamics, political theory , and institutional and societal factors and forces.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Supported by Departmental Structure but Anchored by Senior Faculty Ambassadors  • Account for time -intensive nature and allocate accordingly (i.e. , resources, incentives for  teaching).  • Identify senior faculty ambassadors ; well -respected people are needed to earn instant  credibility and act as champions to navigate internal barriers and the cultures of various  departments .  Horizontal Committee  • Identify and recruit external thought leaders to engage on complex challenges. Committee  to also include students (undergrad uates and PhDs ) and faculty .  Cross -Disciplinary Projects with Faculty and Students  • Creat e a formal program to catalyze new faculty collaborations. Example: MIT faculty visit  other internal department s for an extended period, e.g., faculty to spend 1 –2 months  embedded in the SCoC or another department for exploratory work or focused on a projec t.  • Engag e external thought leaders from industry, government, and NGOs (including  producers of technology, consumers, and regulators) for an extended time to exchange  knowledge, organize events, etc. as part of a visiting fellows program. Example : The Knig ht  Science Journalism Fellowship Program at MIT .  Rotational Programs, Funded Fellowships, and Action Learning  • Create r otational programs or fellowships within industry and/or government that fund  students for one to two years post -graduation in spaces that engage in ethical and societal  issues. Examples: Stanford’s funded fellowships, Google’s Public Policy Fellowship Program .  • Arrange for s tudents to take courses on societal and ethical issues in organizational  computing, which include projects in which students work with organizations to address  those problems. Example: MIT Sloan Action Learning.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 13 
                                                                                                                                                                                    • Arrange for students to take courses in the societal implications of technology , policy, and  political science then work with government organizations. Example: MIT Washington, DC,  Summer Internship Program .  Graduate Research and Postdoctoral Fellowships (Various Tiers)  • Establish requirements to take courses on topics. Weekly lunches, etc. will bring fellows  together.  • Partial Research Assistant Graduate Fellowship (~2 months support) with requirement to take  ~2 classes and incorporate ethical, social, and policy considerations into thesis topic. Re ceive  certificate.  • Teaching Assistant Fellowship Program to train and engage TAs in longer -term commitments to  catalyze cross -disciplinary classes, e.g., bioethics class model.  • Establish immersive graduate or postdoc fellows program that is fully funded to conduct cross disciplinary research in ethics and social responsib ility.  Funded Institution(S) Staffed with Teams Equipped in Understanding Ethical, Policy, and Social  Considerations  • Establish e ntity with researchers a nd faculty from multiple disciplines to provide quick -cycle  feedback, advice , and guidance to students, postdocs, and faculty on new research proposals.  Structure to provide a personalized framework to help researchers further analyze and  articulate ethical and social consideratio ns grounded in thei r specific research. E nsure support  is available including faculty, staff, research assistants , etc.  SCoC Undertakes Self -Volunteering to Include Statements in Research Proposals and Publications  •  Serve  as a  model internally  and  externally  to  develop  and  embrace  new accepted  practices   that require  all  research  proposals  and  papers to  include  considerations regarding   technology  implications. Establish  mechanisms and  stand-up  resources to  reduce  friction   and  foster  habits  of  mind  and  action. Example:  Several  research  communities  and  countries  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 14 
                                                                                                                                                                                           are currently promoting this approach —e.g., the ACM Future of Computing Academy call for  papers and proposals to include consideration of all reasonable broader impacts, both  positive and negative.  BOTTOM -UP CONSIDERATIONS  Foster Faculty Collaboration Through Creative Flexibility  • Encourage facu lty in the development of new courses, curriculum, and interdisciplinary  degree programs , including cross -disciplinary PhD programs. Example: Stanford ‘s multiple  JD/CS PhD candidates .  • Intentionally seed faculty from different departments in co-teaching courses .  Develop a Collection of Curated Case Studies from a Variety of Disciplines  • Provide faculty and students with concrete ways of recognizing examples of ethical, policy,  and societal implications from other fields and disciplines.  • Leve rage these efforts into a course or series of lectures showcasing different cases with  visiting faculty from other disciplines.  • Focus on technical case studies for engineers and designers with different goals from those  endemic to Harvard Business School c ase studies. (Note the recent $5M gift to Harvard  Business School from Schwarzman Research Fund to develop case studies on the  implications of AI for industries, business, and markets.)  Funding Student -Led Collaboration Retreats  • Provide funding to support retreats among MIT’s graduate school community to create  collaborations.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 15 
                                                                       Creating Theme -Based Departmental Lectureship Awards  • Recognize faculty through high -profile events and receptions where lectureship awards are  bestowed for work on themes related to ethical, policy, and societal implication s.  Present Mini -Symposiums, Workshops, and Other Events  • Examples : (1) Arthur Miller Lecture on Science and Ethics, an endowed lecture series  hosted annually at MIT, and (2) Morison Lecture and Prize in Science, Technology, and  Society, an endowed prize -lectureship awarded annually at MI T.  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 16 
                   Appendix  ORGANIZATIONAL F  RAMEWORK   The  working  group  developed  the  following  organization al  frameworks  and  organizational  principles informed  by o ur  external benchmarking  efforts  and  internal scan  of  current activities.   MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 17 
                     Internal MIT Efforts Societal  •MAS.533: AI for Impact (Health & Sustainability) •6.UAT: Effective Oral Communication •6.419: Statistics, Computation and Applications •15.S14: Global Business of AI & Robotics •Civic Media: Collaborative Design Studio •Human-Machine Collaboration in Art Making •AI & The Future of Work (Nov 19th) •IDSS –SMART Series •Morison Lecture & Prize - Science, Tech, & SocietyPolicy •6.805/STS.085: Foundations of Internet Policy •6.S978: Privacy Legislation –Law & Technology •17.309/STS.082: Science, Technology, & Public Policy •AI Policy Congress •AI & Governance Symposium Ethical •MAS.S64: Applied Ethical & Governance Challenges •2.900/6.904: Ethics for Engineers •AI & Ethics Reading Group •Arthur Miller Lecture on Science & Ethics •Jain Family Institute Workshop on Ethics of  Technology (Fall 2019) •Ethics and Computing Speaker Series (2019) •Assembly Program on Ethics and Governance of AITechnical •6.034/6.S899: Artificial Intelligence •6.883: Module in Advanced Topics in AI •6.867: Module in Machine Learning •HST.956: Module in Machine Learning for Healthcare •6.894: Module in Advanced Topics in Graphics and  Human-Computer Interfaces •6.033: Module in Computer Systems EngineeringDesign + Build Policy & Technical SolutionsCofC Ecosystem Analyze + Articulate Societal & Ethical Challenges CofC Catalyst MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 18 
                    BENCHMARKING OF EXTERNAL ACTIVITIES  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 19 
                                                                                                                                                                                      External Benchmarking Informed by Outreach Efforts :  ● Barbara Grosz | Harvard University | Higgins Professor of Natural Sciences -Computer  Science  ● Batya Friedman | University of Washington | Professor in the Information School +  Adjunct Professor in Computer Science + Adjunct Professor in Human -Centered Design |  Pioneered Value Sensitive Design (VSD)  ● Helen Nissenbaum | Cornell Tech | Professor (Philosophy) in the Information Science  Department  ● Helen Scott | NYU | Professor of Law and Founder & Co -Director of the Leadership  Program on Law & Business  ● Jeremy Weinstein | Stanford | Professor of Political Science  ● David Culler | Berkeley | Interim Dean For Data Sciences & Information + Former Chair of  EECS  ● Barbara van Schewick | Stanford Law School | Professor of Law + Director of Stanford's  Center for Internet & Society  ● Larry Kramer | Stanford University | President of the William & Flora Hewlett Foundation  + Former Dean of Stanford Law School  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 20 
                                                                                                                                            ● Keith Winstein | Stanford University | Assistant Professor of Computer Science (former  MIT student)  ● Cathryn Carson | Berkeley | Associate Dean of Social Sciences  ● Deirdre Mulligan | Berkeley | Associate Professor in the School of Information at UC  Berkeley, faculty Director of the Berk eley Center for Law & Technology,  ● David Danks | Carnegie Mellon University | Head of Philosophy Department  ● Doug Sicker | Carnegie Mellon University | Department Head of Engineering Policy  Program (EPP)  ● Nick Feamster | Princeton University | Dep uty Director -Center for Information  Technology Policy + Professor of Computer Science  ● Shannon Vallor | Santa Clara University | Professor of Philosophy -Technology + Google's  part -time Ethicist  ● Rob Reich | Stanford University | Professor of Poli tical Science  ● Reid Simmons | Carnegie Mellon | Autonomous Systems Professor  ● Allison Simmons| Harvard University | Professor of Philosophy  SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMPUTING WORKING GROUP MEMBERS  Melissa Nobles (Co-Chair)  Kenan Sahin Dean, School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences; Professor, Department of Political Science  Julie Shah (Co-Chair)  Boeing Associate Professor, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics  Hal Abelson  Class of 1992 Professor of Computer Science and Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science  Marc Aidinoff  Graduate Student, Program in Science, Technology and Society  Kirstin C. Boswell-Ford  Chaplain to the Institute and Director, Office of Religious, Spiritual, and Ethical Life  Alex Byrne  Head and Professor of Philosophy, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy  David Clark  Senior Research Scientist, Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 21 
                                                                                                                                                                              Randall Davis  Professor of Computer Science and Engineering, Department of Electrical Enginee ring and  Computer Science  Genevre Filiault  Assistant Dean for Curriculum, Registrar’s Office  Joi Ito  Director, Media Lab; Professor of the Practice, Program in Media Arts and Sciences  Stephanie Jegelka  X-Window Consortium Career Development Assistant Profe ssor of Computer Science and  Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science; Member, Institute for  Data, Systems, and Society  David Kaiser  Germeshausen Professor of the History of Science, Program in Science, Technology and Society;  Professor, Department of Physics  Wanda Orlikowski  Alfred P. Sloan Professor of Management and Professor of Information Technology and  Organization Studies, Sloan School of Management  Mary Jane Porzenheim  Undergraduate Student, Department of Biology  Rebecc a Saxe  Professor of Cognitive Science, Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences  Peter Szolovits  Professor of Computer Science and Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering and  Computer Sciences; Member, Health Sciences and Technology Faculty  Bern hardt Trout  Raymond F. Baddour Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering  Pam Walcott  Associate Registrar for Curriculum, Registrar’s Office  Daniel Weitzner  Principal Research Scientist, Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory  Infrastruc ture  MASSACHUSETTS INSTIT UTE OF TECHNOLOGY | 77 MASSACHUSETTS AVE NUE, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02139  PAGE 22 
