Dutch   Digitalisation Strategy Getting the Netherlands ready for the digital future
4 |
 | 5Content Summary 7 Chapter 1. The Netherlands as digital leader 11 1.1 Ambitions and goals 11 1.2 Approach 12 1.3 A shared assignment 13 1.4  Action levels: local, national, European, international 13 Track 1: Leveraging social and economic opportunities 15 Chapter 2. Economic opportunities 16 2.1 Digitally skilled SMEs 17 2.2 A progressive and flexible industry 17 Chapter 3 Social opportunities 18 3.1  A transparent and accessible e-government 18 3.2 Smart and sustainable mobility 19 3.3  Using digitalisation to improve quality of life 19 3.4 Sustainable and safe food supply 21 3.5 A flexible, sustainable energy system 22 Track 2: Strengthening the foundation 23 Chapter 4.  Groundbreaking research and innovation 24 4.1  A strong national base for knowledge, research and innovation 24 4.2  Innovation-friendly, future-proof legislation 27 Chapter 5.  Changes in work, new skills and lifelong learning 29 5.1 Up-to-date curriculum in education 29 5.2 An adequate basic level of digital skills 30 5.3 A learning workforce 30 5.4 Sufficient ICT professionals 31 5.5 Clarity about working via platforms 32 Chapter 6. A dynamic digital economy 33 6.1 Competitive markets 33 6.2 Fair relationships 34 6.3 A thriving data economy 34 6.4 A world-class digital infrastructure 36 Chapter 7. Strengthening the resilience of citizens and organisations 38 7.1 A safe and secure digital society 38 7.2  Protection and control of personal data 40 7.3  Appropriate protection when buying online 42 Chapter 8.  Fundamental rights and ethics in the digital age 43 8.1 Cooperation and dialogue 44 8.2  Reliable information and content on online platforms 45 Chapter 9. Moving forward 46
6 | 
 | 7Summary Digitilisation is transforming economies and societies  around the world at a rapid pace. The Netherlands is in an  excellent position to capitalise the associated economic  and social opportunities. The digital infrastructure is  world-class, the workforce is well educated and we have a  tradition of cooperation, such as between businesses,  knowledge institutions and the government. At the same  time, digitalisation also raises new, fundamental  questions, for example about protecting our privacy and  the future of our jobs.  To make use of the opportunities offered by digitalisation  and to provide answers to these questions, the  Netherlands must lead the way with research, experi ments, and the application of new technology. In this way,  we will strengthen Dutch earning capacity, be able to give  better direction to technological developments and make  full use of the economic and social opportunities offered  by digitalisation. In order to be at the forefront, we also need to increase  trust of citizens and businesses. To this end, we are  strengthening the foundation for digitalisation, amongst  others in the field of privacy protection, cybersecurity,  digital skills and fair competition. The challenge in this  transformation is to get and keep everyone on board, not  only on the labour market, but in society as a whole.  The government is therefore committed to a two-pronged  approach: 1.  Leveraging social and economic  opportunities (acceleration) An important part of digitalisation is taking place in social  sectors in which the government plays a relatively large  role. This includes healthcare, mobility, energy and the  agri-food sector. The digitalisation of public administra tion itself is also an important task. The challenge for the  government is to speed up and support the digital  transition in these sectors. Policy area Ambition/guiding principle Actions Digitally skilled SMEs The government supports SMEs in the  transition to a digital economy.The programme Accelerating the digitalisa tion of SMEs (Versnelling digitalisering mkb)  will be published before the summer. A progressive and flexible industry By 2021, Dutch industry will have Europe’s  most flexible and best digitally connected  production network.With the Smart Industry Implementation  Agenda (Implementatieagenda Smart  Industry), we are promoting the  digitalisation of Dutch industry. A transparent and accessible  e-governmentInformation, government services and  new technologies are accessible to  everyone.An ambitious, broad agenda for the  digitalisation of public administration will be  sent to Dutch parliament around the  summer. Smart and sustainable mobility An integrated mobility system in which the  user and their movements are central. The  Netherlands is the global test site for  smart mobility.Before the summer, the government will  send out a letter about Smart Mobility  developments on the road. A Digital  Transport Strategy will be drawn up before  the end of 2018. The aim is to improve the  interconnectedness of the transport sector. Using digitalisation to improve quality  of lifeThe Netherlands benefits from digital  opportunities to improve people’s quality  of life, remain healthy and self-reliant for  as long as possible and to help decide on  the healthcare we need.The innovative capacity of the healthcare  system will be increased, and awareness,  knowledge and competences will be  strengthened. Sustainable and safe food supply Digitalisation will make an important  contribution to people, planet and profit,  such as increased food safety and reducing  the environmental impact of agriculture. We will invest in programmes to make  agriculture more sustainable by means of  digital technology.  A flexible energy system Developing flexible energy networks,  which will play an important role in  making efficient use of the energy system  and reducing the costs of the transition.We are looking into ways in which energy  data can be made more widely available,  while the customer retains control over their  data.
8 |2. Strengthening the foundation (basic conditions) The foundation for digitalisation – including privacy protection, cybersecurity, digital skills and fair competition – must  be strengthened further. The government will focus on five key focus areas such that citizens and businesses can take  advantage of the opportunities offered by digitalisation. Theme Ambition/guiding principle Actions Groundbreaking research and innovation A strong national base for knowledge,  research and innovationThe Netherlands is actively contributing  ideas, participating and benefiting and is a  co-decision-maker with regard to the  future direction of digitalisation. This  requires a high level of knowledge and  cooperation between research  universities, universities of applied  sciences, other knowledge institutions, the  business community and government  bodies.• As a key enabling technology ICT will have  a central role in the renewed Top Sector  Policy. • We are working on public–private  partnerships in the field of big data  analysis, cybersecurity, blockchain, artificial  intelligence, 5G and quantum computing. • We are initiating an internationalisation  approach focused on trade facilitation,  international cooperation and strategic  acquisition.  • We are looking to maximise  interconnections between the National  Science Agenda ( Nationale  Wetenschapsagenda ), the Digital Society  Research Agenda ( Onderzoeksagenda Digitale  Samenleving ) of the Association of  Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU), the  action lines of Team ICT and the various  departmental agendas. Innovation-friendly, future-proof  legislationLaws and regulations should not impose  unnecessary restrictions on innovation.• A contact point will be set up where  businesses can report obstacles to digital  innovation in laws and regulation. • Testing and experimenting at test sites will  be made easier. Changes in work, new skills and lifelong learning Up-to-date curriculum in education Young people should have good basic ICT  and information skills and are media  literate.In the curriculum for primary and secondary  education, attention will be paid to digital  literacy and practical skills to better equip  pupils for the future.  Adequate basic level of digital skills Everyone can participate in the digital  society.We are working on training initiatives for  people with limited digital skills. A learning workforce People can keep developing themselves,  so that they can continue to do their work  well and with pleasure in a changing  environment.Before the summer, the government will  present an action plan for a breakthrough in  the field of lifelong development. Sufficient ICT professionals Companies should be able to find  sufficient well-qualified staff.Further development of the Human Capital  Agenda ICT and continuation of the  Technology Pact ( Techniekpact ). Clarity about working via platforms Providing better support to people in  finding the right employment relationship  and giving employers a clearer framework.• The government carried out a survey on  the position of employees carrying out  work via platforms and recently sent it to  Dutch parliament. • In the coalition agreement, measures were  announced to provide more clarity for the  self-employed and employers, and to  prevent pseudo self-employment.
 | 9Theme Ambition/guiding principle Actions A dynamic digital economy Competitive markets Markets remain competitive such that the  digital economy remains fair and  competitive.There will be an investigation into the extent  to which current competition regulation still  meets the requirements and an analysis of  various instruments to keep markets  competitive. Fair relationships Platforms must behave fairly towards  suppliers selling on these platforms.Commitment to transparency between  platforms and businesses about terms and  conditions, dispute resolution and search  results, also in Europe. A thriving data economy The Netherlands is the best at sharing data  within and between sectors.• We will explore open, cross-sectoral  agreement for responsible and voluntary  sharing of data between companies. • The government will develop a vision on  data sharing. • Government data will be made more  accessible.  A world-class digital infrastructure Maintain international leadership in fixed  and mobile communications networks.Before the summer, a Digital Connectivity  Action Plan ( Actieplan Digitale Connectiviteit )  will be published to make 5G technology  widely available, among others. Strengthening the resilience of citizens and organisations A safe and secure digital society People and businesses should be able to  use digital technologies safely.• In April, the government published the  Dutch Cyber Security Agenda, together with  the associated ‘Roadmap for digitally  secure hardware and software’ ( Roadmap  Digitaal Veilige Hard- en Software ). • The Digital Trust Centre will provide  companies with up-to-date information  and concrete advice in the event of cyber  threats. • This year, the Ministry of Defence will be  renewing its Cyber Strategy. Protection and control of personal data People should be able to rely on their  privacy being well protected online and  have control of their personal data.• The government is actively involved in the  formuliation and implementation of an  ambitious EU ePrivacy Regulation.  • Within this government’s term, the ‘Taking  Control of Data’ ( Regie op Gegevens )  programme will provide clear frameworks  for personal data management. Effective protection when buying  onlineDigital consumers should be able to take  informed decisions about the products  they buy.Stronger disclosure requirements and greater  transparency on platforms regarding the  identity of suppliers. Fundamental rights and ethics in the digital age Trust in the digital future Safeguarding public values and human  rights remains of crucial importance in this  digital age. Therefore, they must be  included in the development and use of  data and algorithms.• The government has asked the Scientific  Council for Government Policy (WRR) for  advice on the opportunities and threats  associated with artificial intelligence. • A working group will be set up to deal with  the ethical issues surrounding digitalisation  and will, where necessary, propose  concrete follow-up actions. Cooperation and dialogue A broad social dialogue on new ethical  issues is desirable. The government is organising and  stimulating dialogues on technological  developments.  Reliable information and content on  online platformsAn open information society in which the  democratic rule of law is protected and in  which online illegal activities are tackled  quickly and sustainably.Additional resources have been made  available for investigative journalism.
10 | FOUNDATION Groundbreaking  research and education  Towards a learning and agile economyChanges in werk,  new skills and  lifelong learning Everyone should be  able to participate A dynamic  digital economy  Competitive, fair  and transparentStrengthening the  resilience of citizens  and organisations   Digital security and  privacy taken care ofFundamental rights and  ethics in the digital age  Trust in the digital future Dutch Digilisation Strategy Agriculture Sustainable and  safe food supplyEnergy Government Transparent  and accessibleIndustry Progressive  and /f_lexible Education Higher quality  education Healthcare Improve quality  of life Mobility Smart and  sustainableFlexible energy system for the transition SMEs Digitally  skilled GOALS
 | 11Chapter 1. The Netherlands as digital leader Getting the Netherlands ready for the digital future Digitalisation is transforming our economy and society at  a rapid pace. This is a global development, with digital  technologies - such as big data analysis, artificial intelli gence, blockchain, 3D printing, cloud storage and  computing, and the Internet of Things - being used in an  increasing number of fields. Digitalisation is the most  important source of growth, innovation and new business  activities. Furthermore, digitalisation is necessary to solve  the social challenges of our time, such as rising healthcare  costs, increasing traffic congestion or ensuring sufficient,  healthy and sustainably produced food.  Digitalisation is also transforming our daily lives. We can  shop online, do business with the government online,  work remotely, do online banking and submit our tax  return online. Internet platforms, such as Google, Bol.com,  Booking.com and Marktplaats, offer major advantages, for  example better access to knowledge, easier and faster  communication and new opportunities for businesses and  consumers to offer products and services in the  Netherlands and abroad.  The Netherlands is in an excellent position to capitalisethe  economic and social opportunities created by digitalisa tion. We have a world-class digital infrastructure. Wi-Fi  and Bluetooth were invented in the Netherlands. The  AMS-IX, one of the most important internet exchange  points in the world, is located in our country. The  Netherlands has a highly educated workforce at an  international level and Dutch consumers often lead the  way in embracing new digital applications. We also have  leading companies in the Netherlands such as Booking. com, TomTom, Adyen, NXP , Coolblue and WeTransfer.  Moreover, we have a long tradition of cooperation  between companies, scientists and governments. This has  contributed to the emergence of innovative clusters all  over the Netherlands.  Digitalisation also raises new, fundamental questions, for  example about the protection of our privacy, the future of  our jobs, our cybersecurity, the market power of digital  platforms, who has access to data, what information is  reliable, how new technologies can be used ethically, how  our democracy functions and how to ensure that people  and businesses can keep up with this transformation.  Digitalisation is changing our world, but this does not  mean that we have no control over these changes.  Previous technological transformations have taught us that countries that are at the forefront of the application  of new technologies are often also the most prosperous  afterwards and are best able to deal with risks.  1.1 Ambitions and goals   WHAT IS IN THE COALITION   AGREEMENT? The coalition agreement contains the necessary  ambitions and actions with regard to digitalisation:  • We can become Europe’s digital frontrunner.  • Digitalisation is needed in areas such as healthcare,  mobility and public administration.  • We are reinforcing necessary basic conditions such  as digital security, privacy, digital literacy, competi tion, innovation and the modernisation of  legislation.  • We are committed to further strengthening the  European digital single market. If the Netherlands wants to make the most of the  opportunities offered by digitalisation and tackle problems  effectively, we will need to innovate and accelerate. In line  with the coalition agreement, the government therefore  wants the Netherlands to become the digital leader in  Europe. We are fully committed to the opportunities  offered by the new economy and information society.  From energy transition to affordable healthcare and from  excellent logistics and mobility to a sustainable food  supply, digital technologies play a key role in achieving  breakthroughs in all these areas. Take, for example, the  possibilities offered by care robots, smart traffic lights and  electricity grids, and drones for precision agriculture. With this Dutch digitalisation strategy, the government is  giving further substance and direction to these challenges.  In doing so, we will focus on three ambitions: 
12 |1. Leading the way and taking advantage of opportuni ties.  We aim to become Europe’s digital leader. We want  the Netherlands to be a pioneer and testing ground in  the field of digital innovation, a place where companies  from all over the world can responsibly develop and test  new applications. And the place where successful  innovations are subsequently rolled out across the  country. In this way, we want to contribute to a society  with fewer traffic jams and better mobility, a society  where we use our energy more efficiently, where food is  produced more safely and sustainably and where people  can live longer lives, independently and in good health.  This will also strengthen Dutch earning capacity and  enables us to give better direction to technological  developments. 2. Everyone can participate and we work together.  With  a rapid development like digitalisation, it is important to  get and keep everyone on board, both on the labour  market and in society as a whole. This will require  everyone to learn basic skills as soon as possible and  continue to learn and develop in later life so they can  adapt to changing occupations and tasks. It is also  important for us to continue to support vulnerable  groups. The government wants everyone to be able to  participate and benefit. This also means that our  approach will involve intensive cooperation with  companies, knowledge institutes and civil society  organisations. 3. Trust in the digital future. Digitalisation is transforming  our economy and society, but not the values that we  continue to share. For the government, it goes without  saying that values and fundamental rights such as  safety, the protection of privacy, self-determination, fair  competition and accessible and good public administra tion will continue to be guaranteed in the digital age.  Trust is the foundation of the digital transformation. We  need to be able to trust that our data are secure and  that digital technology is used with care. As far as we are  concerned, these are the proverbial safety barriers for  the digital transformation. The Netherlands can maintain its strong international  position and stand out from the competition by being  progressive and innovative, nurturing public–private  partnerships and having an eye for issues such as inclusi veness, safety and security and privacy protection. The  Netherlands is ready for the digital future!1.2 Approach For the first time, the government is presenting a single  joint strategy in the area of digitalisation. This is essential,  because this transformation will have an impact on almost  all policy areas – from e-health  to smart mobility, from  education to safety and public administration. By working  together, we can strengthen the exchange of knowledge  and best practices, and this will save us from continuously  reinventing the wheel and coming up with conflicting  legislation.  The government wants the Netherlands to lead the way in  the application of new technology. This means that we  need to be at the forefront of research, experimentation  and implementation, while maintaining the trust of our  citizens and businesses. That is why we are strengthening  the foundation for digitalisation, in the field of privacy,  cybersecurity, digital skills and fair competition, among  other things.  In order to do so, we will be focusing on two tracks:  Track 1: Leveraging social and economic opportunities An important part of digitalisation takes place in social  sectors where the government has a relatively large role.  This includes areas such as healthcare, mobility, education,  energy and the agri-food sector. The further digitalisation  of public administration itself is another important  challenge. The challenge for the government is to  accelarate and stimulate the digital transition in these  sectors. We do this by targeted programmes and in  cooperation with companies, knowledge institutions and  local and regional authorities, among others. In summary,  we are fully committed to the social and economic  opportunities of digitalisation. Track 2: Strengthening the foundation through five key focus  areas  i. Groundbreaking research and innovation: the  development and application of high-quality know ledge about digital technologies and services is essential  for the Netherlands’ competitiveness and earning  capacity. This also contributes to solving social issues. ii. Changes in work, new skills and lifelong learning:   digitalisation and robotisation have far-reaching  consequences for the labour market. On the one hand,  they offer opportunities for new jobs and work that is  less physically strenuous. On the other hand, some jobs  will disappear, and it is uncertain how the changes will  affect different groups of people in the future. It is  therefore very important that people have excellent  skills, both digital and otherwise. This is to avoid a  division in society between those who can take  advantage of opportunities and those who cannot.
 | 13iii. A dynamic digital economy:  data are the input for the  new economy. We want to make the most of the  opportunities this offers. High-quality connectivity is a  basic prerequisite for this. At the same time, the  growing importance of data raises questions and  concerns about data access and control, and there are  concerns about the power of large platform companies.  iv. Strengthening the resilience of citizens and organisa tions:  everyone must be able to use the opportunities  offered by digitalisation safely and must not be afraid  to do so. The government wants to make citizens and  businesses resilient and protect their digital security  and personal data. v. Fundamental rights and ethics in the digital age: the  digital transformation raises fundamental questions,  for example about the influence of algorithms on  autonomy and equal treatment. These important  issues should not be overlooked. The government has  set itself the task of working with the people concerned  on practical frameworks and solutions. 1.3 A shared assignment The government cannot do this on its own. If we want to  make the most of the opportunities offered by digitalisa tion and effectively combat any negative effects, intensive  cooperation will be required with other governments,  businesses, civil society organisations and knowledge  institutions. The government will take the lead in this and give  direction to technological developments at an early stage.  A good example is the establishment of the National  Blockchain Coalition ( Nationale Blockchain Coalitie ). Through  this, the government cooperates with knowledge  institutions and companies from various perspectives  (innovation, legal, knowledge, skills) to stimulate the  application of a specific technology in the Netherlands and  worldwide, and thus seize opportunities. The advantage of  this is that, at an early stage, attention is also paid to  public values such as privacy and security. This also places new demands on the way in which the  central government organises itself. Dealing with digitali sation requires a fundamentally different view and focus  on the government’s competences. Digital knowledge and  skills must become one of the government’s core  competences at all levels. Moreover, the government  needs to become more agile. This means that we must  invest in our innovative strength with a solid knowledge  and research agenda, work together intensively and make  more room for experiments. We must work in small steps  and apply and scale up smart solutions more vigorously. In  doing so, we must make use of the knowledge available in society, and it is important that policy and legislation is  sufficiently adaptive to respond to changes. This makes digitalisation an essential and inseparable part  of the policy objective of every minister. Each minister is  responsible for its own area and will start working on the  issues at play there.1 At the same time, we must support  each other where possible and necessary. 1.4  Action levels: local, national, European,  international Digital technology is blurring geographical distance. On  the Internet, it is just as easy to order something from a  nearby store as it is to order it from a webshop on the  other side of the world. In the future, it will be ever easier  to perform one’s work from a variety of different  locations. It will even become possible for specialist  activities such as medical operations by doctors to be  carried out remotely. At the international level This means that both opportunities and problems can  come from anywhere in the world. It also means that  other countries will be confronted with almost exactly the  same issues as the Netherlands. For this reason, the EU,  the G20 and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation  and Development (OECD), for example, are working on a  uniform approach to artificial intelligence. And we are  formulating agreements on global e-commerce in the  World Trade Organisation (WTO). The Netherlands is also investing in dialogue with  countries that are responding to the issues around  digitalisation in a fundamentally different way, and in  doing so is engaging with like-minded partners in order to  convince others to join international agreements, for  example within the UN system. Furthermore, the  Netherlands is actively participating in international  dialogue with broad groups of stakeholders on the impact  of technology on international law and legal issues.  Examples of such issues are the application of the right to  privacy in the digital age and dealing with jurisdiction  issues while preserving the open and free internet. 1  The extra financial resources required for these tasks are part of the  relevant departmental budget and/or have been announced in the  coalition agreement. See also: http://www.rijksbegroting.nl/2018/ overzicht/begrotingsstaat . 
14 |At this moment, trade agreements are the most efficient  way for the European Union to reach agreements on  digital trade. The digital economy is addressed in several  EU trade agreement negotiations with non-member  countries (e.g. Australia, New Zealand, Chile and Mexico).  Europe aims to promote the free movement of data  worldwide and at the same time ensure that personal data  and privacy are protected just as well outside the EU as  they are within the EU. At the European level A considerable portion of the policy and legislation in the  digital field is adopted within the European Union,  including in the area of free movement of data between  EU countries, strong unambiguous privacy legislation,  copyright, joint research programmes and a joint approach  to cybersecurity and platforms. Therefore, Europe is a  crucial in this context. In this process, we have to keep the  impact of such measures on SMEs and innovation in mind,  such as through a SME-Test of new regulation. The  government is also committed to a strong (digital) single  market. Important steps have already been taken in this  area in recent years. The government is committed to  completing the current initiatives of the European  Commission as much as possible in 2018. At the same time, it is clear that there remains much to be  done. That is why, with a view to the new Commission that  will take office in 2019, the Netherlands wants to discuss  the important issues that digitalisation raises at European  level, so that we can act together where possible. The  government’s efforts will be in line with this Dutch  strategy: European citizens and businesses must be able to  take full advantage of the opportunities offered by  digitalisation so that European businesses can remain  globally competitive. At the same time, public interests  and fundamental rights must remain effectively safe guarded. Europe must therefore set out a clear, futureproof framework with the right preconditions. To that end,  the government wants the Netherlands to contribute  actively to the European debate on these issues in order to  give direction to policy development at an early stage. At the national level The government will ensure an coordinated approach of  the Netherlands at the international level. At the national  level, we establish important frameworks and provide  direction to and space for innovation. We do so, for  example, in the areas of the labour market, the education  system, digital safety and security, research and innovation  and connectivity. Where necessary, the government will  have to lay down new rules, remove rules or adapt existing  rules in order to continue to safeguard important public  values and fundamental rights. In the case of rapid  developments, it is important to be flexible.  At the local level Digitalisation is driven by global technological develop ments, but it is at the local level that the various conse quences of digitalisation come together. The effects can  vary greatly at different locations, which is why local  customisation is important. For example, the holiday  rental of houses has far-reaching consequences for the  local quality of life in popular cities, but much less so in  small villages. In such cases, municipal authorities are best  equipped to provide customised solutions.  URBAN AGENDA FOR THE EU We are shaping our ambition to be a European leader  in line with European agendas such as the Urban  Agenda for the EU. Cities meet and use each other’s  digital solutions for the modernisation and  transformation of their city. Such cooperation  presents opportunities to strengthen the strategic  position of the Netherlands in the field of  digitalisation.
 | 15Track 1: Leveraging social and   economic opportunities Everyone can benefit Digitalisation is essential for our future earning capacity and prosperity. Investments in ICT account for about 20% of  economic growth and digitalisation is crucial for the current and future growth of our productivity. Furthermore, data  flows growth is unprecedented. For example, the volume of cross-border data traffic increased by a factor of 45 between  2005 and 2014.2 Innovative technologies can also make an important contribution to the major social challenges we are currently facing,  such as reducing CO2-emissions or traffic jams, future-proof education or sustainable food supply. The government  wants the use of digital technologies to contribute to issues that are of great social importance to all Dutch citizens, such  as our prosperity, healthcare, our food supply and the climate. 2 McKinsey, Digital Globalization, https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/digital-globalization-the-new-era-of-globalflows . 
16 |Chapter 2. Economic opportunities Digitalisation offers a wide range of opportunities for  companies to operate globally where this was previously  not possible. For example, many small businesses and  start-ups can export their products and services via digital  platforms. Digital technologies also enable far-reaching  logistical planning, so it is not necessary to come up with,  make and sell products from a single location. What’s more, the structure of markets sometimes  undergoes a fundamental change. For example, the world’s  largest provider of overnight accommodation does not  own a single hotel room. In addition, completely new  products, jobs and services are being created. It is  estimated that over a million people in the EU work in the  app industry, a sector that hardly existed only 10 years ago.3 3 See, for example  http://www.progressivepolicy.org/wp-content/ uploads/2016/11/2016.06-Mandel_The-App-Economy-in-Europe_LeadingCountries-and-Cities-final.pdf .Markets and parties that stick to old revenue models are  often severely affected by these developments. However,  there are also many companies that are adapting their  revenue models and are thus benefiting from digitalisa tion. For example, Signify (Philips Lightning) can now  provide lighting as a service, instead of light bulbs as a  product, and Siemens can supply sustainable electricity  instead of wind turbines. Many Dutch businesses operate on a global playing field  and are highly dependent on exports. In order to remain  competitive, the Dutch business community must lead the  way in digitalisation. The government is therefore  providing a boost by means of specific action programmes  for SMEs and the industry. INTERNET PLATFORMS Major internet platforms such as Google, Facebook, Alibaba, Uber and Airbnb are now playing an indispensable role  in the economy and in our lives. We spend a lot of time on such platforms, buying and selling things,  communicating, navigating the web or the road and enjoying music or series. A flourishing platform economy has  been created in the Netherlands in recent years, with leading companies such as Adyen, Booking.com, WeTransfer  and Thuisbezorgd.  Internet platforms offer major benefits, such as improved access to knowledge, easier and faster communication  and new opportunities for businesses and consumers to buy and sell goods and services. As a result, platforms have  quickly become crucial hubs for social and economic traffic. The government sees the advantages and importance of platforms and wants to make as much room as possible for  innovation. At the same time, this means that platforms have an important responsibility, for example in the fight  against disinformation and illegal content. They also have an important responsibility towards affiliated workers  and consumers, when paying taxes, with regard to transparency and explainability of algorithms and in the way they  handle data. In this strategy, the government will set out the principles and actions that are appropriate to these  changing responsibilities of platform companies. THE NETHERLANDS AS A DIGITAL GATEWAY TO EUROPE The Netherlands is the digital gateway to Europe and an important data hub. The basis for this lies in the presence  of internet exchanges and the associated backbone connectivity, data centres and large cloud providers. Partly  because of this extensive ecosystem, various technology companies have chosen the Netherlands as their place to  do business in Europe. These companies have established their head offices, data centres, sales and marketing  offices and/or distribution centres in the Netherlands.
 | 172.1 Digitally skilled SMEs SMEs have traditionally been the job engine of the Dutch  economy and have a strong presence in high-growth  sectors. Digitalisation offers many opportunities for  companies to increase their productivity. For example, it  lets them respond more quickly to customer requirements  by analysing data on payment behaviour, automate  payroll administration with the aid of smart apps or set up  an online marketing campaign.  These opportunities are currently not being sufficiently  exploited for various reasons. The Annual Report on the  State of the SME sector ( Jaarbericht Staat van het MKB ) shows  that, in all sectors, only a few SMEs are highly productive.4  Companies indicate, among other things, that they do not  know which digital innovation is most profitable for them  and how to implement it in their company. In addition,  companies experience uncertainty due to concerns about  cybersecurity, for example.  Previous experience has shown that, when scaling up   ICT innovations in SMEs, there is no silver bullet. It is  mainly about involving the right parties in order to break  down barriers that inhibit the upscaling and large-scale  use of ICT .    ACCELERATING THE DIGITALISATION   OF SMEs Because of their economic and social importance, the  government wants to support SMEs in their transition  to a digital economy.5 Digitalisation as a means of  increasing productivity is central to the ‘Accelerating  the digitalisation of SMEs’ ( Versnelling digitalisering mkb )  programme.6 The focus is on the technologies that  contribute most to this: big data, automation and  online sales and marketing. On the basis of promising  regional initiatives, practical tests are started, which  are then scaled up if they are successful. The first  practical test, ‘Driven by data’ in ‘s-Hertogenbosch,  has now been launched.7 By identifying and dissemi nating best practices, we enable businesses to learn  from each other. We do this in cooperation with the  business community, regional parties, industry  organisations and educational institutions, among  others.  4 https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/rapporten/2017/11/17/jaarberichtstaat-van-het-mkb-2017 5 With this, the government is also executing the motion of the  member Amhaouch et al. (No. 82 34775 XIII). 6 The programme is part of the Action Plan for SMEs (MKB Actieplan),  which will be presented to Dutch parliament before the summer. 7 https://platformdrivenbydata.nl/.2.2 A progressive and flexible industry The government’s ambition for industry in the Netherlands  is to have the most flexible and best digitally connected  production network in Europe by 2021, through which the  manufacturing companies involved will also achieve  substantial energy and material savings.  Therefore, the Smart Industry Implementation Agenda  (Implementatieagenda Smart Industry ) was published this  spring, in which the government focuses on the digitalisa tion of industry. In addition to the manufacturing industry,  this also includes, for example, companies active in the  chemical and construction industries. The Action Agenda is  implemented by a public–private consortium, ‘Team Smart  Industry’.8 The focus is on three priorities: 1. Ensuring that SMEs participate and benefit from the  knowledge from, for example, field labs. 2. Ensuring workers are prepared by investing in skills. 3. Safe and effective digital collaboration in the chain, for  example when sharing data.   SMART INDUSTRY With the Smart Industry Implementation Agenda  (Implementatieagenda Smart Industry ), we are promoting  the digitalisation of Dutch industry. This agenda has  five policy action lines: • Getting companies started: using concrete actions  to support companies with digitalisation. • Field labs: these are testing grounds where  companies can experiment with the development  and implementation of new technology. • Research: joint research agenda for the develop ment of new knowledge. • Skills: contribute to the development of digital  skills. • Digital environment: standardisation, cybersecurity,  data sharing. 8 This consortium consists of the Association of Mechanical and  Electrical Engineering (FME), Koninklijke Metaalunie, the Dutch  Chamber of Commerce, the Confederation of Netherlands Industry  and Employers (VNO-NCW), the Ministry of Economic Affairs and  Climate Policy, the Top Sectors High-Tech Systems and Materials  (HTSM) and ICT and the regions.
18 |Chapter 3 Social opportunities An important part of digitalisation is taking place in social  sectors in which the government has a relatively large role.  This includes areas such as healthcare, mobility, energy  and the agri-food sector. The further digitalisation of  public administration itself, including the justice system, is  another important challenge. The government wants to  stimulate and support the digital transition in these areas. SMART CITY STRATEGY The Netherlands has developed a National Smart City  Strategy with the aim of accelerating the application  of innovation and technology in Dutch cities. The  innovative solutions are also used to strengthen the  international competitive position of Dutch cities and  the business community. In order to give substance to  this, the five largest municipalities in the Netherlands  are creating five working groups on social challenges  such as safety, health, mobility, resilience and circular  economy. 3.1  A transparent and accessible  e-government The government is committed to an inclusive and  transparent (digital) society. We want information,  government services and new technologies to be acces sible to everyone. We enable citizens and companies to  take advantage of the opportunities offered by the  information society. In the coalition agreement, the government has therefore  announced that, under the direction of the Ministry of the  Interior and Kingdom Relations, an ambitious, broad  agenda will be developed for the further digitalisation of  public administration. The State Secretary for the Interior  and Kingdom Relations will develop this with local and  regional authorities and send it to Dutch parliament  around the summer. The focus will be on the digitalisation  issues and challenges facing the government, as well as  the interests of citizens, social institutions and businesses.  The implementation of this agenda will also be done  jointly. Adequate provision of information and public services Public services to citizens and businesses are provided by  hundreds of different organisations. These organisations  must operate simultaneously as a single government, act  proactively, seamlessly refer people to other services,  provide control over data and ensure that the total service  package of the government – in the language of the  Scientific Council for Government Policy (WRR) – passes  the so-called ‘feasibility test’ for citizins.  The basis for this is a sound, future-proof, basic digital  infrastructure that enables the digital government to  function (such as DigiD, MijnOverheid, Ondernemersplein. nl and e-invoicing). The government is therefore working  on the further development of this basic infrastructure.  Accordingly, the question is to what extent this digital  infrastructure can be used for the benefit of society as a  whole, for example by companies. And in its development,  account has to be taken of ensuring the interoperability of  national and international infrastructures. BASIC SKILLS AND DIGITAL   OPPORTUNITIES Digital and technological developments offer  opportunities to address social challenges such as  semi-literacy. For example, social media and other  digital means allow more people with low basic skills  to be reached than more formal routes and training  courses do. Working on basic skills online can be a  low-threshold solution, especially for people who are  afraid or otherwise unlikely to enter a school or  library.  There are already various options available in this  regard, such as the website oefenen.nl  and the Digital  Help Platform ( digitaalhulpplein.nl ). The Digital Help  Platform is an initiative of, among others, the Ministry  of Education, Culture and Science, the Ministry of  Social Affairs and Employment, the Ministry of the  Interior and Kingdom Relations and the Royal Library.  An example of a project in which many people have  been reached via social media is ‘Education for  Women with Ambition’ ( Educatie voor Vrouwen met  Ambitie ), financed by the Ministry of Education,  Culture and Science.
 | 19The government also wants to do its utmost to make its  own online products and services as accessible as possible.  To this end, the government is working on the ‘Humans  Centre Stage’ programme ( Mens Centraal ). In addition, the  new European accessibility guidelines and the Convention  on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities of the United  Nations are being implemented. In this context, the  government has decided that, in addition to being able to  do business with the government digitally, people should  also be offered the possibility of personal, physical  contact.   BROAD AGENDA FOR   E-GOVERNMENT Around the summer, the government will present an  ambitious, broad agenda for the further digitalisation  of public administration. This will focus on, among  other things, adequate information provision and  government services, the safeguarding of public  values and the transformation of public  administration. 3.2 Smart and sustainable mobility With the current growth of the economy and the popula tion, and the associated urbanisation, we see a conside rable increase in traffic, resulting in traffic jams. With  regard to public transport, the capacity of facilities in and  between major cities, especially at peak times, is reaching  its limits. At the same time, affordable public transport in  sparsely populated areas is becoming increasingly difficult  to maintain. In addition, climate targets call for a substan tial reduction in carbon emissions, and therefore for  innovations in passenger and freight transport.  The past few years have shown that technological  developments can make a major contribution to these  challenges. Consider, for instance, improved traffic flow,  road safety and the possibility of driving more efficiently  and cleanly. Smart applications allow road users and  vehicles to become part of a larger, intelligent transport  system, with continuous data exchange and matching of  supply and demand. As a result, the mobility system is  becoming increasingly intelligent, data-driven and  interconnected.  The government’s ambition is to achieve a more inte grated mobility system in which the focus is on the user  and their movements. As a result, travellers should  experience more convenience – whether travelling by car,  public transport or bicycle. What’s more, through the use  of ICT , passengers should be optimally able to determine  which form of transport is best at which time and easily switch from one form of transport to another. The aim is  to achieve a greater spread across the various transport  options and times of day in order to make optimum use of  the available infrastructure. We want to keep the  Netherlands mobile and accessible. The Netherlands  wants to make the most of the opportunities in this area  and be the global test location for smart mobility.9 This requires the government to adopt a flexible approach  and to be prepared to learn through experience, while  accelerating upscaling where necessary. The challenge is  therefore to move from pilot projects and experiments to  scaling up. The government cannot do this on its own.  Coalitions with regions, civil society organisations and  private parties and at the international level will be needed  to achieve the ambitious shared goals.    DIGITAL TRANSPORT STRATEGY At the end of 2018, the government will send its  Digital Transport Strategy to Dutch parliament, which  deals primarily with better coordination within the  transport sector through the sharing of data between  companies and government authorities, and the  development towards paperless transport.  In addition, around the summer, the government will  send a letter to Dutch parliament about Smart  Mobility. Spearheads in this letter are a future-proof  infrastructure, the creation of space for a new  generation of vehicles and new mobility concepts and  putting the necessary preconditions in place, relating  to data (data protection, control over data), privacy  and security, among others. 3.3  Using digitalisation to improve quality  of life Technological developments offer more and more  opportunities to improve our quality of life, to remain  healthy and self-reliant for as long as possible and to help  decide on the healthcare we need. New medicines and  innovative treatments mean new hope for people who are  seriously ill. E-health solutions offer chronically ill people  the opportunity to continue working and participating in  society. Inventive tools are giving older people their  freedom back, so they no longer have to relinquish  control. Moreover, everyone, young and old, can take  advantage of apps and wearables to live healthier lives. 9 See also the Declaration of Amsterdam, https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ documenten/rapporten/2016/04/29/declaration-of-amsterdam-cooperation-   in-the-field-of-connected-and-automated-driving .
20 |Because of these possibilities, the government has set  three  e-health  goals for the period up to 2019. These should  contribute to better, more accessible and more efficient  healthcare. The goals are: 1. Access to medical data: by 2019, at least 80% of  chronically ill people will have direct access to their own  medical data, and at least 40% of all Dutch people. 2. Taking independent measurements: by 2019, 75% of  chronically ill and vulnerable elderly people can use  self-measurements and share the results with their  healthcare provider. For example, they will be able to  measure their own blood pressure or cholesterol levels. 3. Online contact with healthcare providers: by 2019,  people receiving healthcare and support at home will be  able to contact a healthcare provider 24 hours a day  using a monitor if they so wish. This fits in with a broader transformation in healthcare, a  transformation from treating illnesses to stimulating and  supporting health, self-reliance and quality of life, in the  right place and lasting a lifetime. This really is a completely  new way of thinking and doing things. The ever-increasing  costs and a growing shortage of people working in  healthcare reinforces this necessary development.  We are leading the way in the Netherlands. Innovating is in  our blood, and we are already doing a lot to stimulate the  use of e-health applications, for example through a Health  Innovation School or by supporting start-ups. Moreover,  we are working together in the healthcare consultation  group ( Informatieberaad Zorg)  on ensuring the continued  development of the preconditions for digitalisation. For  example, we are making sound agreements on standardi sation and consistent terminology, so that people involved  in healthcare can understand each other unambiguously.  If healthcare for Dutch people improves, there will also be  opportunities for businesses to spread their wings abroad.  If agreements are made in the Netherlands that can also  be used internationally, we will become a testing ground  other countries will look to with great interest. For this  reason, for example, we are working together in the healthcare sector in an international Digital Health Society,  launched under the Estonian Presidency, in which a  ‘Coalition of the Doing’ agrees on common standards.    DIGITALISATION IN HEALTHCARE For the further digitalisation of healthcare, we will  focus on a number of measures: • Increasing awareness, knowledge and competen cies:  there is still much to be gained in terms of  awareness of the possibilities among healthcare  users, healthcare providers and management. The  Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport is therefore  committed to providing information, offering a  platform for best practices and organising events  such as the e-health week. In addition, the Ministry  of Health, Welfare and Sport promotes the  incorporation of e-health and innovation in basic  and subsequent education; • Increasing the innovative capacity of the  healthcare system:  in order to give promising  initiatives more opportunities to scale up more  quickly, we are developing incentives and impro ving preconditions. We support SMEs with  knowledge and expertise concerning the complex  healthcare sector. The government provides seed  capital to funds that invest in e-health companies.  We are optimising the guidance to the statutory  health insurance package and in the funding, and  have developed healthcare service billing codes  specifically aimed at promoting e-health.  • Provision of information, standardisation and  safety : in the healthcare consultation group  (Informatieberaad Zorg ), stakeholders and the  Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport make  agreements on the coherence of the provision of  information in the healthcare sector, for example in  the area of standardisation, data and privacy and  information security. A GREAT DEAL IS ALREADY POSSIBLE IN THE AREA OF E-HEALTH. • In Zwolle, 3,000 thrombosis patients have been using self-measurement and remote care for many years. Almost  all of these people are over 60 and many are over 80. As a result, there is less pressure on the outpatients’ clinic  and people are hospitalised at the right time. This is done in more places and for more conditions, such as chronic  intestinal complaints in Groningen and COPD in Doetinchem. • The Maastro Clinic in Maastricht, where cancer patients are treated, learns from treatments in different hospitals  and different countries by implementing new data on a daily basis. On the basis of these data, they deduce what  works and what does not, and in which cases. This makes today’s healthcare better than yesterday’s. All this is  possible without the data leaving the source where the data were recorded: the research comes to the data. This  is privacy-friendly and innovative, and the World Economic Forum sees this as a shining example.
 | 213.4 Sustainable and safe food supply In the agri-food sector, digitalisation can make an  important contribution in various areas. This applies to the  people concerned, nature and the environment, as well as  the economy: People, Planet and Profit.  There are currently various initiatives aimed at digitalisa tion in the agricultural, horticultural and food sectors.  Knowledge and innovation By means of the programmes for the Top Sectors in Agri &  Food and Horticulture and Starting Materials, we are  stimulating the development of knowledge and innova tion. A number of Big Data and ICT research projects have  also been started in the context of the Food Agenda.  Furthermore, we are actively seeking to align with  European knowledge and innovation programmes such as  the ‘Internet of Food & Farm’ initiative.  Open cultivation Tractors that are automatically controlled by GPS have  already become common practice in open cultivation.  Work is now carried out on applications that specifically  calculate the correct cultivation operations on the basis of  different variables of place and time (precision agriculture). DIGITALISATION FOR PRECISION  AGRICULTURE Precision agriculture enables potato and sugar beet  growers to use crop protection products, apply  manure or control nematodes much more sparingly.  This innovative method of agriculture requires a lot of  ICT-related technology such as sensor technology,  computing power, the Internet of Things (IoT), data  analysis, artificial intelligence and robotics. In the  longer term, this technology can play a key role in a  more ‘nature-inclusive’ form of agriculture.People • Contribute to global   food security •  Care for health •  Better consumer information   (increasing transparency) •  Preparing for an aging   population in the sector   (less successors) • Larger margins on the   national and global market •  Less dependence on subsidies  (CAP , EU) •  Frontrunner in product   innovation (export opportunities) •  New revenue models   (health, recreation, shorter   chains)Planet Profit• Reducing environmental impact   (nitrogen/phosphate problems,   manure surplus) •  Increasing nature quality and   biodiversity •  Reducing risks for animal welfare •  Increasing soil fertility
22 |Glasshouse horticulture Within the glasshouse horticulture sector, the use of  sensors and computers in climate control, water manage ment, CO2 and fertilisation has been highly developed.  The use of robots in harvesting, product sorting and  packaging is also common practice. Logistics and trade are  likewise, to a large extent, supported by automation. Livestock farming Milking and feeding robots have become exceedingly  common in the livestock industry. The collection and  processing of animal data is crucial here, and the control of  these data is an important issue. Within the dairy  sector, a  data hub is being put together that supports the sharing of  data from dairy farmers via a licensing structure. This  initiative requires further development, which other  agricultural sectors can also join in on. Production chains  Work is being carried out on determining the position of  products in the chain, mostly at the level of containers or  freight/vehicles/train wagons. The next step is to be able  to more accurately monitor the location at pallet or even  product level. This development offers the prospect of  transparency in the chain, improved food safety and faster  intervention in the event of an emergency.   THE FUTURE OF AGRICULTURE,   NATURE AND FOOD QUALITY Before the summer, the government will present an  opinion on the future of agriculture, nature and food  quality, which will also focus on the role of digitalisa tion. Social goals and ambitions are central to the  further development and application of digital  technology. The focus will be not only on knowledge  & innovation programmes, but also on implementa tion programmes. 3.5 A flexible, sustainable energy system In its coalition agreement, the government announced a  Climate Agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions  by at least 49% by 2030. Towards 2050, further action will  be needed to meet the Paris climate targets. An essential  part of this challenge is to make the energy supply more  sustainable. In order to make the transition to sustainable  energy possible, we are focusing on the most cost-effec tive measures. Emphasis will be placed on the potential of intelligent  energy networks, which enable more efficient use of  existing infrastructure and new market models.  Digitalisation makes it possible to increasingly control  both production and consumption of energy remotely, and  therefore offers the possibility of increasingly fine-tuning  supply and demand. If, for example, less solar or wind  energy is temporarily available, decentralised storage from  electric cars can offer a solution.  At the same time, digitalisation poses a risk to security of  supply, as previously autonomous systems are becoming  interconnected and new digital vulnerabilities are  introduced. This is a matter of concern in the light of,  among other things, increasing geopolitical tensions and  risks to national security.   DIGITAL ENERGY TRANSITION • Large-scale integration of renewable energy  requires the mitigation of large peaks in supply, or  the limitation of demand when less energy is  available. Intelligent grids and flexible market  models encourage producers and customers to use  the energy system efficiently and to reduce the  costs of the transition. Grid managers, energy  suppliers, installation companies and technology  companies, among others, are gaining experience  in this field in various trial projects. The govern ment is monitoring the balance between the policy  objectives affordable, reliable and sustainable  and is  drawing up frameworks within which these  developments can take place. • Under the Electricity Act ( Elektriciteitswet ), grid  operators are collecting usage and other data. The  government is investigating how these data can be  made more widely available, whereby customers  retain control over their data. The data must be  usable by market parties and customers, where  parties has access to the data necessary to fulfil  their role in the energy system, while maintaining  privacy, confidentiality and integrity safeguards.  The first steps in this direction are expected to be  included in the first part of the Energy Act at the  end of 2018. • The government has announced a legislative  agenda for the energy transition with a view to  revising existing regulation. At the same time, we  are working on an ambitious climate agreement,  one of the tracks of which concerns ‘research,  development and innovation’.
 | 23Track 2: Strengthening the foundation Putting the basic conditions in place In order to take advantage of the social and economic opportunities offered by digitalisation, the necessary conditions  must be in place. These include fundamental issues such as digital skills and literacy, research and innovation, fair  competition, security, privacy protection and other fundamental rights.  
24 |Chapter 4.  Groundbreaking research and  innovation Towards a learning and agile economy Research and innovation are of great importance to our  prosperity, well-being and productivity. The role of ICT in  this respect is becoming increasingly important. A number  of important technologies are currently emerging that offer  opportunities for different sectors, markets and revenue  models. These technologies include big data analysis,  blockchain, artificial intelligence, 5G, cybersecurity,  photonics and quantum computing.  The government wants ICT research and innovation in the  Netherlands to have maximum impact. We want the  Netherlands to actively contribute ideas, participate and  benefit and be a co-decision-maker with regard to the  direction digitalisation will take in the future. This requires  a continuous high level of knowledge, for which collabora tion between research universities, universities of applied  sciences, other knowledge institutions, businesses and  government authorities is essential. In this way, we can  strengthen our adaptive, innovative and responsive  capacity, allowing us to deal with and respond to the many  and rapid changes in the world around us.  Challenges The government sees two major challenges: 1. Increasing international competition.   More and more countries are engaged in the develop ment of high-quality digital innovations and are actively  engaged in the transformation to a digital economy.  Countries such as Germany, the United Kingdom,  France, China, South Korea, Japan, the United States  and Canada are making substantial investments, in  research in the field of artificial intelligence, for  example. The Rathenau Institute states that, in the long  term, Dutch investment in science and innovation may  lag behind that of many other countries.10 In addition,  international competition is making it more difficult to  attract and retain scientific talent. 2. Increased coordination between science, society and  business is necessary.   Research and the application of new digital technology  are increasingly focusing on major social issues.  10 See the recently published TWIN report, https://www.rathenau.nl/nl/ kennisecosysteem/totale-investeringen-wetenschap-en-innovatietwin-2016-2022 .Examples include the use of big data analysis for healthy  ageing and blockchain technology for a sustainable food  supply. The combined effort of the scientific community,  the business community and government authorities  with regard to ICT as a key technology is necessary to  further increase the impact of research and to link it to  major social challenges in the Netherlands and world wide, such as digital security. By working together and  sharing knowledge, the scientific community, govern ment authorities and companies can make more  effective use of scarce resources such as budget, talent  and time. Practice has also shown that businesses, civil  society organisations, knowledge institutes and  government authorities often have similar questions  about digital innovations. For example, how does a new  technology work? How can we apply it responsibly to  social challenges and commercial opportunities? Does  this fit within legal frameworks? Is it actually safe?  The challenge for the Netherlands is to tackle questions like  these together and to organise the cooperation between  different disciplines, between fundamental and applied  research, between government authorities and with  companies as efficiently as possible and to create optimal  space for innovation. The approach to this is twofold:  i. strengthening the national base for knowledge, research  and innovation; ii. innovation-friendly, future-proof legislation. 4.1  A strong national base for knowledge,  research and innovation The development of knowledge about digital technologies  in the Netherlands is of good quality across the board, but  too fragmented. We therefore need to make choices and  join forces. Through better cooperation and knowledge  circulation, solutions developed in one sector can also be  used in other areas. In this context, the government  applies the following principles:  1. Connecting the entire knowledge chain: different  parties in the knowledge chain must be able to work  together in a coordinated manner and be able to  exchange knowledge, whether it concerns fundamental  or applied research, commercialisation of research  (including field labs) or organising demand for new  products and services.
 | 252. Working on a multidisciplinary basis:  it is becoming  increasingly important for research to include social  aspects, such as take-up and behaviour, ethics, safety  and security and privacy. Cooperation between all  research disciplines is therefore important. 3. Focus and fast decision-making: a multitude of rapid  technological developments also requires a concentrated  and well-considered effort on the part of the govern ment, in terms of both opportunities and challenges.  This means that it is essential to quickly understand  technology and its effects on society and the economy. 4. Continuity:  funding – both public and private and the  combination of these – should be long-term and stable,  because building up knowledge and working on  innovations takes time.  National Science Agenda In order to strengthen the national knowledge base,  technological developments and their impact on society  are first and foremost an important theme in the National  Science Agenda ( Nationale Wetenschapsagenda) . This  involves questions such as: how can we better anticipate the  impact of new technology on people and society, and better  understand and assess the impact of existing technology; what  social changes as a result of technological changes are imminent  and affect our prosperity; and what is the impact of new technolo gies and big data on the effectiveness of governance and the rule of  law?  Digitalisation is thus a common thread throughout  the various tracks of the National Science Agenda.  Cybersecurity is also present in various tracks. RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES ARE   COMMITTED TO THE DIGITAL SOCIETY . Dutch research universities are also aiming to make the  Netherlands a pilot country and a testing ground in the  field of digital technology aimed at people and society.  To this end, they have joined forces and jointly launched  the ‘Digital Society’ programme ( De Digitale Samenleving) .  This programme focuses, among other things, on the  themes of responsible data sciences, health & wellness,  learning & education, work & organisations, digital  cities & communities, safety & security and citizenship  & democracy. In 2018, these themes will be further  developed into work programmes in cooperation with  private and public partners.ICT RESEARCH IN HIGHER   PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION (HBO) Applied research at universities of applied sciences  focuses on solving social issues and challenges. This  gives room to a wide variety of practical questions, in  which companies and other organisations are  intensively involved. As a result, ICT research in higher  professional education is socially relevant. In order to  make higher professional education research more  visible, ICT lecturers are working intensively on  combining forces in the jointly applied research agenda. Research and public–private partnerships In order to further strengthen the national knowledge base  and its application, the government intends to give  digitalisation a central place in the updated Top Sector  Policy (ICT as key technology). In this regard, alignment with  the National Science Agenda ( Nationale Wetenschaps agenda ),  the Digital Society Research Agenda ( Onderzoeks agenda  Digitale Samenleving ) of the Association of Universities in the  Netherlands (VSNU) and the various departmental agendas  is key. The government is committed to linking the various  agendas and promoting cooperation.   DIGITALISATION CENTRAL TO   RESEARCH AND INNOVATION POLICY • The government intends to give digitalisation a  central place in the updated Top Sector Policy (ICT  as key technology). Good alignment with social  issues is also important in this respect. The  government will inform the parliament about this  before the summer.  • We are looking to maximise interconnections  between initiatives in the context of the National  Science Agenda, the VSNU’s ‘Digital Society’ ( De  Digitale Samenleving ) programme, the action lines of  Team ICT for applied research and departmental  knowledge agendas so that they can optimally  reinforce each other. • The government is driving innovation by making  increasing use of the Small Business Innovation  Research scheme (SBIR). Applied research and public-private partnerships In order to increase the impact of research into digital  technologies, the government will be focusing on the  following six action lines for public–private partnerships.  These action lines focus on a number of emerging digital  technologies in social and/or economic fields. They are  open to anyone who wishes to participate, both public and  private parties. 
26 |  ACTION LINES FOR PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (TEAM ICT) Action line 1: Big data analysis  Commit2Data is a long-term national research and innovation programme aimed at cross-sectoral cooperation on  big data issues. This programme will be expanded to include social challenges, such as care and food/agriculture.  For SMEs, we will make knowledge about data analysis and secure data sharing available via regional ‘big data value  centres’ (data hubs). These will be located in Eindhoven, Groningen and Wageningen, among other places. Action line 2: Cybersecurity In order to strengthen the long-term cyber resilience of companies, citizens and governments, we develop multiannual knowledge development programme. This is a public–private approach aimed at boosting high-quality  cybersecurity knowledge development. To this end, research will be carried out into how various initiatives,  processes and instruments relating to cybersecurity research can be better aligned. The possibilities for a (virtual)  institute for cybersecurity research is also being explored. With the development of the National Cyber Security  Research Agenda (NCSRA3), we will be combining the strengths of research universities, universities of applied  sciences, organisations for applied research (TO2), the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (Dcypher),  companies and organisations from the fields of healthcare, mobility, energy, etc. In anticipation of this, the Ministry  of Justice and Security, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry  of the Interior and Kingdom Relations have earmarked €1 million for a call for research in 2018.  Action line 3: Blockchain technology Blockchain technology enables safer, more efficient and easier data exchange and processing. Abuse of this techno logy is difficult because every transaction is controlled by several computers and is transparent. The government  would like to encourage experimentation in this field. It is therefore one of the founders of the Dutch Blockchain  Coalition. This coalition lays the foundation (with building blocks such as digital identities, security, legal frameworks)  for the large-scale roll-out of blockchain technology with parties from the logistics, energy, financial services and ICT  sectors and the government. Based on five cases, an exploratory study will be carried out under the supervision of  the Research and Documentation Centre ( Wetenschappenlijk Onderzoek- en Documentatiecentrum  – WODC) (part of the  Ministry of Justice and Security) into the scope offered by legal frameworks for exploiting the opportunities of  blockchain technology, mitigating possible risks and exploring points requiring attention for future legislation.  Action line 4: Artificial Intelligence Artificial intelligence offers great possibilities for interpreting medical images, personal assistants on mobile phones  and vehicle navigation. A new national programme will therefore be introduced. With this national programme, we  are going to develop knowledge about technology, applications and the human factor (ethics, behaviour and  take-up). In order to pool resources, we are working together with a network of regional hotspots in Amsterdam,  Delft, Utrecht, Nijmegen, Groningen and Eindhoven. Action line 5: 5G 5G is a new, high-grade and very fast ICT infrastructure, which is still very much in development. It enables new  wireless services to address economic and social challenges, such as remote inspection, smart mobility, agriculture  and remote care. In Groningen, government authorities, knowledge institutions and companies are working  together in a 5G testing ground to develop knowledge and innovative wireless applications in rural areas, which  SMEs can also participate in. In addition, 5G trials are being prepared in urban areas, including around the  Amsterdam Arena. The Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management is exploring the possibilities of using 5G  for smart mobility. Action line 6: Quantum computing and quantum software Quantum computing can become a groundbreaking new way to process data very quickly and in large quantities in  the future. The Netherlands is a leader in this field. For example, QuTech – a collaboration between Delft University  of Technology, the Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), industrial partners and the  Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate – is the centre for scientific and technological challenges in the field of  quantum computing. It is important that we further strengthen cooperation and practical application in this area.  We are going to do this, for example, with the QuSoft research centre, an initiative of the University of Amsterdam,  VU University Amsterdam and CWI, the Dutch centre for mathematics and computer science.
 | 27ICT infrastructure for research Developments in cloud computing, open science, security  and privacy are also placing ever-increasing demands on  the digital infrastructure for research. The Netherlands  currently has the high-performance infrastructure  (comprising high-performance computing, networks and  data) of SURF. In order to keep it up to standard in the  future, the coalition agreement has freed up extra  resources and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific  Research (NWO) will develop a plan to distribute them. In  addition, national investments are made in the supercom puter. It is also important to be able to keep up with  European developments. Examples include the European  Open Science Cloud (EOSC) and the initiative to streamline  Member States’ investments and agendas in the area of  high-performance computing (EuroHPC). BLOCKCHAIN FOR A MORE   TRANSPARENT AND FAIRER PRICE In Ethiopia, 300 local coffee bean growers are  participating in a blockchain pilot at the initiative of a  Dutch FairChain business. Blockchain enables data to  be managed and increases transparency and the  mutual trust of chain partners. As a result, the number  of intermediaries and the administrative burden are  reduced. This enables growers to have more control  over the quality, production and distribution of the  coffee and to increase their income. International cooperation In 2015, the Netherlands exported almost €33.7 billion in  ICT , representing a growth of 18% (excluding re-exports).  In order to maintain the Netherlands’ strong international  position in the field of ICT , the government is working on a  strategic internationalisation agenda for ICT . This will  allow us to focus on trade promotion, knowledge  diplomacy, international innovation cooperation and  strategic acquisition. We will draw up the internationalisa tion agenda in cooperation with our stakeholders and in  line with the policy document ‘Investing in Perspective’  (‘Investeren in Perspectief’ ) of the Ministry for Foreign Trade  and Development Cooperation.   INTERNATIONALISATION AGENDA In order to increase opportunities and possibilities for  the Dutch ICT sector, the government will come up  with an internationalisation approach after the  summer. This will allow us to focus on trade promo tion, knowledge diplomacy, international innovation  cooperation and strategic acquisition.4.2  Innovation-friendly, future-proof  legislation In the digital world, developments can be rapid and  far-reaching to the point that existing rules no longer  suffice or become superfluous. Rules can also conflict or  contradict each other. At the same time, new rules may  also be required, to improve safety or to boost innovation,  for example. The government does not want regulation to impose  unnecessary restrictions on innovation. In times of major  change, sufficient room for responsible experimentation  and learning is very important. Of course, relevant public  values, interests and fundamental rights must still be  taken into account.  A great deal of innovation is already possible within  existing regulation. Often, providing information about  rules or agreements with supervisory authorities can  remove uncertainty. It is important for businesses to be  able to contact the government if they experience  regulatory bottlenecks. For example, the Dutch Authority  for the Financial Markets (AFM) and De Nederlandsche  Bank (DNB) offer parties the opportunity to share  knowledge about issues at an early stage when launching  innovative financial products, services or business models  on the market, via, for example, blockchain technology  (Regulatory Sandbox concept).  Creating or changing rules takes time. The government will  therefore commission more strategic explorations in order  to be able to identify the legal, technological and ethical  consequences of new developments at an early stage. We  are doing this together with companies, institutions, the  scientific community and other stakeholders, and the  results will also be shared interdepartmentally and  inter-administratively. This approach with drones, for  example, was successful. It is also important, when  preparing policy and legislation, to make use of the  possibilities offered by digitalisation, such as the Internet  consultation website (www.internetconsultatie.nl) and the  Legislative calendar ( Wetgevingskalender ).11 11 In the summer of 2018, the Legislative Calendar (Wetgevingskalender) will be extended with a digital legislative dossier in which  the documents to be made public will be clearly shown.
28 |  SPACE FOR DIGITAL INNOVATION To create scope for digital innovation, the government will take the following actions: • Businesses that innovate with digital technologies such as blockchain and artificial intelligence can face regulatory  barriers. Where possible, the government wants to work together with businesses to remove these obstacles. The  government will therefore set up a point of contact where businesses can report any obstacles in policy and  legislation. The plan is to link this contact point to the existing programme in this field ( Ruimte in Regels ), so that  businesses have a single recognisable (digital) contact point for reporting obstacles to innovation in legislation  and regulations. • Testing and experimenting at test sites will be made easier. Specific attention will furthermore be paid to the  possibilities and preconditions for testing locations for drones.  • The ‘Better regulation and services’ ( Betere regelgeving en dienstverlening ) programme will be launched before the  summer, with the aim of removing concrete obstacles to innovation and creating scope for experimentation. In  this context, it will be considered whether more legal scope for experimentation is needed in a general sense. To  this end, we will be looking at experiments across the board, including in relation to statutory provisions on  experimentation, in which the government experiments with regulations in a controlled setting, but also other  ‘scope-creating’ instruments. 
 | 29Chapter 5.  Changes in work, new skills and  lifelong learning Everyone should be able to participate Digital developments are bringing about a substantial  acceleration of the pace at which tasks and occupations  are changing12. There are many opportunities for more and  better work. For example, repetitive or physically  demanding work can be taken over by machines, allowing  people to focus on more challenging and creative tasks.  Under the influence of digitalisation, jobs and tasks will  change and in some cases will even disappear. At the same  time, however, there will be a greater need for cybersecurity  specialists, data analysts and app developers, for example. It is important to get and keep everyone on board, not  only on the labour market, but also in society as a whole.  Within certain groups, a relatively large number of people  lack basic ICT skills.13 It is therefore important that  everyone learns the basics early on, that people continue  to learn and develop to adapt to changing professions and  that we support vulnerable groups. In this way, we can  take advantage of opportunities, society will be more  resilient to threats and we can make sure that nobody is  left behind.  5.1 Up-to-date curriculum in education Young people are growing up in a world where ICT is an  indispensable part of life. The government therefore  considers it important that young people are given a good  foundation in basic ICT and information skills and media  literacy. This deserves sufficient attention in both primary  and secondary education.    The coalition agreement states that the curriculum review  for primary and secondary education will be continued.  The government is aiming for a dynamic implementation.  This will create more attention for digital literacy and  practical skills.  12 See, for example, European Commission, ‘ICT for work: Digital skills  in the workplace’ and the exploratory study carried out by the Social  and Economic Council (SER), ‘Mens en technologie: samen aan het  werk (robotisering)’ (‘People and technology: working together  (robotisation)’). 13 Higher risk groups are people aged 45 and over, the non-employed  and people with a low level of education. https://ecbo.nl/portfolioitems/laaggeletterden-achterblijvers-in-digitale-wereld/.The curriculum review will of course also impact the  knowledge and skills needed by teachers, and it is  important that schools address this. There is also a  national training programme, ‘Digital Teacher’  (‘Digileerkracht ’), which aims to strengthen the digital skills  of primary school teachers. ICT PROFESSIONALS PROVIDE GUEST  LECTURES IN SECONDARY EDUCATION ‘Pass IT on!’ (‘ Geef IT Door ’) was set up to make young  people interested in studying and working in ICT . This  programme links ICT professionals to a secondary  school to provide a guest lecture. In these guest  lectures, professionals talk about working in the ICT  sector or address a specific subject, such as big data,  cybersecurity or programming. The programme has  been successful, and over 250 schools have already  applied for a guest lecture. MEDIA GUIDE The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is  financing the centre of expertise Mediawijzer.net,  which is a network approach linking more than 1,000  media literacy organisations (including businesses,  schools and libraries). Together with network  partners, Mediawijzer.net organises public campaigns,  carries out research and offers educational services,  with the aim of making young people, teachers and  educators more aware and critical of digital  technology. This approach to media literacy will be  evaluated in the summer and the parliament will be  informed about this approach and possible follow-up  actions in the autumn of 2018.
30 |Senior secondary vocational education (MBO) must also  respond to changes in professional practice and to new  developments, where necessary, so that diplomas do not  lose their value. The main focus is on knowledge, skills and  competences a person studying in senior secondary  vocational education needs in the exercise of their  profession, regardless of the software package, the form  of processing and the working method.14 In the coming years, higher education institutions will be  working on the implementation of the Acceleration  Agenda ( Versnellingsagenda ) for educational innovation,  which will be stimulated by the government. The drive to  really make a difference has never before been this great,  and higher education institutions are committed to  improving education through the use of digital technolo gies. Moreover, educational institutions are taking a critical  look at the content of curricula and exit qualifications in  order to improve the student’s digital skills, for all types of  programmes. This is intended to improve the alignment  with the labour market, so that students are better  prepared to enter the labour market. In addition, the  education sector and the business community are  increasingly managing to cooperate efficiently in public– private partnerships.   NEW CURRICULUM The curriculum for primary and secondary education  will feature a greater focus on digital literacy and  practical skills to better equip pupils for the future.  The aim is to have a new formal curriculum take effect  in 2021. 5.2 An adequate basic level of digital skills The government believes everyone should be able to  participate in society. In a society where digitalisation and  other technological developments are having an everincreasing impact, an adequate basic level of digital  literacy is necessary in order to participate. Even so,  approximately 11% of Dutch people aged 16 to 65 have  little or no experience with computers. This is as high as  20% for Dutch people aged 55 and over and 30% for  people with low literacy levels.15 14 In senior secondary vocational education (MBO), the extent to which  students leave with a certain level of digital skills depends on their  study programme. Every young person also takes a number of  optional courses during their programme. The elective subject ‘Basic  digital skills’ is in the top 5 of the elective subjects followed. 15 ECBO - Laaggeletterden: Achterblijvers in de digitale wereld?  (‘Semi-literate: Lagging behind in the digital world?’), h ttps://ecbo.nl/ portfolio-items/laaggeletterden-achterblijvers-in-digitale-wereld.The government supports various initiatives and encou rages both employers and social parties to give people  with limited digital skills the opportunity to acquire these  skills. Stichting Lezen en Schrijven, the foundation for  reading and writing, supports municipalities in the field of  digital skills with, among other things, the ‘Digimeter’, the  ‘Education for Women with Ambition’ ( Educatie voor  Vrouwen met Ambitie ) programme (for women with low  levels of education who are at a distance from the labour  market), the digital help platform ‘Digitaal Hulpplein’ and  the ‘Taalhuizen’ and ‘Digitaalhuizen’.16 Libraries also play  an important role. The national Library and Basic Skills  programme (Bibliotheek en basisvaardigheden) supports  libraries in organising services for people with limited  language and digital skills. In the coming period, the  government will investigate how this type of support can  be expanded. Collaboration with private parties will be  considered in order to have a wider reach.    FOCUS ON DIGITAL SKILLS The government supports municipalities, libraries and  social initiatives in offering extra training to people  with limited digital skills. As of 2018, digital skills  courses can be offered via the education budget of  municipalities.  Government authorities are paying more attention to  the comprehensibility and user-friendliness of their  digital services. In 2018, various studies are being  conducted to provide insight into what difficulties  people encounter when contacting the government  digitally and how these can be resolved. In addition,  experiments and testing grounds are set up in order  to experience in practice how best to respond to  people’s needs. 5.3 A learning workforce Because of changing jobs and tasks, the government  considers it important that workers keep deveoping  themselves, so that they can continue to carry out their  work well and with pleasure, even in a rapidly changing  environment. However, investing in expertise and new  skills is not yet a matter of course for all workers.  A strong and broadly supported learning culture requires a  broad approach. Employers, employees, Training and  Development funds ( O&O fondsen ) as well as educational  institutions, private trainers, municipal authorities,  regional partnerships and the central government all play  a role in this context. The primary responsibility for  16 See also Chapter 3.1
 | 31lifelong development lies with employers and employees.  The government will set out the necessary preconditions  and ensure support for people who do not have an  employer/client.    LIFELONG DEVELOPMENT Before the summer, the government will present an  elaboration of the coalition agreement in the field of  lifelong development. The focus is on a broad  approach to stimulate a positive learning culture,  together with social partners, educational institutions  and parties in the field. Part of this is the individual  learning account and a digital overview of training  opportunities in order to give individuals more  control over their own learning pathway. In addition,  experiments and pilots will focus on a strong learning  culture in SMEs. The regional support structure will  also be further strengthened through  ‘Leerwerkloketten’ (education/employment informa tion desks) and other initiatives. Furthermore, plans  will be presented to make the training on offer for  adults more flexible, for example through tailor-made  training pathways in line with individual needs.5.4 Sufficient ICT professionals Digitalisation is increasing the demand for programmers,  cybersecurity specialists and data analysts, but supply is  lagging behind. Companies in all kinds of sectors, as well  as government authorities, educational institutions and  other organisations (civic and otherwise), indicate that  they are having difficulty finding enough ICT professionals.  This is having an impact on the Netherlands’ ability to take  advantage of the opportunities offered by digitalisation.  For example, the shortage of people with the right  knowledge is slowing down the further development of  precision agriculture, and cybersecurity specialists are  needed for a secure and well-functioning digital infrastruc ture. In order to ensure a sufficient number of well-quali fied staff, an up-to-date curriculum and the right career  choices are essential. The government wants companies and organisations to be  able to find sufficient well-qualified personnel. Various  parties are developing great initiatives to give jobseekers  with potential for and/or affinity with ICT the chance to  develop this in innovative and creative ways. For example,  the ICT Labour Market Training Fund ( Opleidingsfonds  Arbeidsmarkt ICT ) is encouraging ICT employment projects,  in-company training courses, retraining and reassignment. USING DIGITILISATION FOR BETTER EDUCATION The government wants to use educational technology to achieve higher quality in education. In primary and  secondary education, we aim to have every teacher use the modern teaching materials that are necessary for an  up-to-date curriculum in order to provide attractive education that is more in line with the learning needs and  talents of pupils. Pupils need to be well-equipped, and have the right skills, to keep up in a rapidly changing world.   In recent years, the necessary preconditions for this have been realised in the ‘Breakthrough project on Education &  ICT’ ( Doorbraakproject Onderwijs & ICT ), for example in the field of standards, internet access and privacy. The vast  majority of schools have the use of educational technology on their agenda and are experimenting with it.  Investments have also been made in professionalising ‘demand articulation’ on the part of the educational  institutions with respect to the market, resulting in, among other things, a buyers’ cooperative of and for schools:  Sivon.  However, by no means all schools and teachers are making equal use of the opportunities offered by ICT for  contemporary, challenging and high-quality education. The government therefore wants to continue to support this  development. To take the next step, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and the Ministry of Economic  Affairs and Climate, together with the Primary Education Council, the Secondary Education Council and  professionals and partners in education, will be exploring the strategy for the digitalisation of primary and  secondary education for the coming years. This will in any case focus on strengthening the innovative capacity of  schools and teachers, digital and other skills of pupils and teachers, innovative teaching materials and  infrastructure. It is important in this respect that the education sector itself continue to manage the teaching resources and  materials. Teachers should be able to select, combine, supplement and provide teaching materials to students and  other users as they see fit. The ambition for higher education is for all lecturers to share their teaching materials  openly by 2025 and for it to become common practice to reuse the teaching materials of others. In this way,  teachers can work together on creating better teaching materials.
32 |The government supports these initiatives and contributes  to reducing the shortage of ICT staff by means of the  Human Capital Agenda for ICT and the Technology Pact  (Techniekpact ). In this context, it is important to encourage  girls and women to choose a degree programme/job in ICT . MAKE IT WORK The Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences (AUAS)  and Nederland ICT are working together structurally  to transform highly educated jobseekers without an  ICT background into ICT experts. The aim is to scale  up the successful Make IT Work project. The AUAS  and Nederland ICT are jointly committed to attracting  candidates and companies from all over the  Netherlands. In addition, participating companies can  provide concrete feedback on the curriculum, so that  it remains in line with the current demand for talent.  This project has recently been chosen by the European  Commission as a ‘good practice’ for making Europe  digitally literate. The Human Capital Agenda for ICT contributes to a higher  number of ICT students by inspiring high school students,  stimulating regional cooperation and promoting the  availability of a sufficient number of ICT lecturers/teachers.  In the coming years, the aim is to double the number of  vocational training centres focusing on innovation and  modernisation of education in cooperation with the  business community.  The Technology Pact will be continued as well, and ICT has  been identified as an important transversal theme.  Moreover, the Knowledge Workers Scheme ( Kenniswerkersregeling ) – a simple procedure that also makes use of the  30% tax rule – enables companies to bring knowledge  workers from abroad to the Netherlands if they are unable  to find the necessary personnel within the Netherlands. The government, too, is experiencing problems due to a  shortage of ICT professionals. For this reason, a plan of  action has been drawn up for the recruitment of ICT staff,  entitled ‘Strengthening the ICT workforce in the civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst ). With this action plan, the  government wants, among other things, to improve the  preconditions for attracting, developing and retaining ICT  staff and to be able to experiment on a small scale. In doing  so, the government wants to work more explicitly with  higher education. 17This programme will be rolled out in 2018.   SUFFICIENT ICT STAFF • The Technology Pact will be continued and the  Human Capital Agenda for ICT will be rolled out in  order to improve the availability of sufficient ICT staff.  • The ‘Strengthening the ICT workforce in the civil  service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) action plan  will be rolled out in 2018 in order to be able to  attract and retain ICT staff more effectively within  the central government. 5.5 Clarity about working via platforms With the advance of digital platforms such as Werkspot,  Helpling, Uber, Deliveroo and Foodora, more and more  work in the service sector is carried out via digital platforms.  This allows people to earn money in an accessible and  flexible way. However, an issue with this type of service is  whether the work is performed as an employee or as a  self-employed person. Is the platform therefore an  employer or just a mediator of supply and demand? This  lack of clarity affects the social rights and entitlements of  platform workers, the obligations of platforms towards  workers and the enforcement of taxation.  The government wants to support people better in finding  the right employment relationship and provide employers  with a clearer framework. These issues extend beyond  working via platforms, which is why the coalition  agreement announced measures to provide more clarity for  the self-employed and employers, and to prevent pseudo  self-employment. In the field of platform work, the  government also commissioned a study to gain a better  insight into the consequences of the rise of these platforms.   RESEARCH RESULTS ON WORKING   VIA PLATFORMS The government has commissioned research to gain a  better understanding of how many people are  working via platforms and under what conditions.  The government recently sent this study – with a  response – to parliament. 17 Letter to Parliament  plan van aanpak ICT-personeel rijk (Action Plan  for Government ICT Staff) 
 | 33Chapter 6. A dynamic digital economy Competitive, fair and transparent As a result of digitalisation, new markets have emerged  and existing markets are shaken up. Consumers enjoy  various new products and services that they can find easier  and at lower cost. Thanks to online markets, businesses  have a much wider reach and, with insights from data, can  optimise their processes and create new revenue models.  The government’s role is to provide the ground rules and  effective supervision. The government wants to ensure  that companies can compete with each other in a fair  manner and that newcomers also have sufficient opportu nities. By keeping markets competitive, the Netherlands is  reaping the benefits of digitalisation and we can prevent  becoming too dependent on a limited number of large  companies. The government will pay specific attention to the role of  data in this respect. Data have become an important new  input of the economy and are therefore increasingly  important for businesses to be able to compete and  innovate. The government’s basic principle is that the  government itself should open up its data wherever  possible and should encourage other parties to share their  data responsibly. 6.1 Competitive markets In a short period of time, several very large players have  emerged in the digital economy around the world. This  raises concerns about the emergence of dominant  positions and possible abuses in the form of high prices,  poor conditions or a situation where there is no longer any  real chance that market positions will be challenged. The government considers it important that markets  remain competitive, so that the digital economy also is a  fair and competitive economy. This means, for example,  that businesses should have opportunities to enter  markets and have a choice of channels through which they  offer their product or service, and that consumers should  be able to choose whom they wish to buy a product or  service from.CHOICE FROM A LIMITED NUMBER   OF SUPPLIERS In several sectors, such as care and education, parties  wishing to procure digital products and services face a  market where there are only a limited number of  suppliers to choose from. For example, there are only  two major providers of hospital information systems  in the Netherlands. In such cases, it is even more important that clear and  fair agreements be made about access to relevant  data. We also work as much as possible on the basis  of open standards. In addition, where possible, efforts  are being made to develop so-called ‘digital  commons’, in which technology, data and resources  are shared in accordance with a cooperative model. First of all, keeping markets competitive requires adequate  competition rules and supervision. The national and  European rules also apply to new markets. The govern ment therefore considers it important that, in addition to  the European competition regulator – the European  Commission – the national regulator – the Netherlands  Authority for Consumers & Markets (ACM) – should also be  well-equipped and be able to take effective action. The  ACM has a dedicated team for digital competition, and has  digitalisation high on its agenda across the organisation,  with regard to regulated sectors, generic competition  regulation and consumer protection. In order to be able to  act effectively, the ACM invests in broad expertise and a  coordinated approach and cooperates with other  regulators.  In addition to adequate competition regulation, the  question arises as to whether such regulation is sufficient  to ensure that markets remain competitive. Competition  regulators can often only intervene after the fact, once an  undertaking has already abused its dominant position.  Sometimes, some form of ex-ante regulation is needed, in  particular if there are lastingly established dominant  positions that prevent fair competition. In such cases,  consideration could be given to regulating markets, as in  the case of telecom and energy networks where access to  networks is enforced through regulation. Caution should  be exercised in such far-reaching interventions. Because of  the cross-border nature of markets and businesses, this  issue needs to be addressed at European level. 
34 |  INSTRUMENTS FOR COMPETITIVE   MARKETS At the European level, the government is committed  to keeping markets in which platforms are active  competitive, as well as to clarifying whether adjust ments are needed to the range of instruments  (competition law and otherwise). The government  will also carry out its own analysis of various instru ments, including rate and access regulation, in order  to keep markets competitive. The parliament will be  informed of this in the second half of 2018. 6.2 Fair relationships Businesses that offer their services or products on  platforms can benefit significantly from this, for example  because of the wide range of platforms. However as a  result, businesses may also become dependent on such  platforms. In the mutual balance of power, it is important  that platforms behave fair towards these providers. The  European Commission has recently published a proposal  to improve the relationship between suppliers and  platforms. The proposal imposes transparency require ments on platforms and includes provisions on dispute  resolution. A fair and transparent relationship will  contribute to a well-functioning platform economy,  benefiting both businesses and consumers and preventing  smaller businesses from being driven into a corner.    FAIR BUSINESS • In the negotiations on the European proposal on  the relationship between platforms and companies,  the government will promote a fair and transparent  relationship. This will contribute to a well-functio ning platform economy. The government wants to  prevent the proposal from imposing too many  detailed requirements on platforms, which would  result in high implementation costs. This is  particularly true for small platforms, which may  find it more difficult to compete with larger  platforms due to detailed requirements.18 • The government is conducting research into the  effect of low-price guarantees on the functioning of  the market and is expected to inform parliament  about this in the second half of 2018. 18 See the BNC file for the complete position taken by the government  (Parliamentary Paper 22 112, No. 2579).Technology companies offer their services in an increasing  number of sectors. This often raises the question of the  extent to which existing sector-specific regulations also  apply to new players. In the recent past, for example, this  has been the case in the taxi market as a result of the  emergence of platforms such as Uber. In the future, we will  probably have to deal with these issues in other sectors as  well, such as healthcare and education. In dealing with  this, the government will always put the public interest  first and, where possible, stimulate innovation and  entrepreneurship. This will sometimes call for a review of  the rules so that new technologies and players are given  room to manoeuvre without public interests being put  under pressure. In the taxi sector, for example, innovative  entrants are welcome, but the most important thing is  that the safety of taxi transport is guaranteed. The  government believes it is important to have a fair  economy and a level playing field between traditional and  new players, where new players cannot escape the rules. In addition, in an increasing number of sectors, platforms  allow private individuals to enter markets as new  suppliers. There is not always a level playing field between  professional suppliers on the one hand and private  suppliers entering the market through partial platforms on  the other. Where possible, the government will focus on  self-regulation by platforms and on cooperation between  local and national governments and platforms. In some  cases, setting pragmatic boundaries between professional  and private activities, such as setting a maximum number  of times a service may be offered, can offer an appropriate  solution. This applies, for example, to home restaurants. If  such agreements prove to be insufficiently effective, the  government will consider whether additional regulation is  necessary, for example in the case of the rental of tourist  accommodation.   UNIFORM REGISTRATION OF   HOLIDAY RENTALS The government is in discussion with municipal  authorities and platforms about a form of uniform  registration of property owners who offer their homes  for holiday rental on platforms, so enforcement by  municipal authorities can be implemented more  effectively and efficiently. 6.3 A thriving data economy Data are becoming increasingly important in the economy  and society. They are a crucial input for the new economy.  For example, data on the nutritional needs of crops can  contribute to more efficient business processes, and smart 
 | 35sensors on lampposts can provide information about, for  example, air quality or noise levels.  Moreover, data have the special feature that they can be  used by several parties at the same time for different  applications. For example, data on a car’s performance can  be used by the car manufacturer to develop an even better  model, by maintenance companies to improve their  services, by insurers to ascertain the circumstances of an  accident and by the Dutch Directorate-General for Public  Works and Water Management ( Rijkswaterstaat ) to promote  road safety and plan maintenance. Moreover, many new  possibilities and insights can arise by merging different  datasets, and reliable datasets are crucial for the develop ment of applications using artificial intelligence. The  government therefore considers it important to make the  best possible and responsible use of data. DATA SHARING IN INDUSTRY Brainport, SURF, TNO, the Province of North Brabant  and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate have  formed a coalition that is committed to the safe and  innovative sharing of data in industry. This coalition  wants to create a safe and reliable environment  where companies can exchange data and develop  new business propositions. The Data Value Centre  Smart Industry may become an open innovation  platform for the Netherlands where businesses can  experiment with data and big data. BIG DATA ANAL YSIS IN THE GOVERNMENT Statistics Netherlands (CBS) is developing into a  centre of expertise for the deployment of big data  analysis for statistical information. Data from more  than 200 government agencies is being collected at  CBS for statistical analysis. In this way, other  government authorities can be helped with statistical  issues, for example on the economic development of  villages and towns. CBS is a global leader in this field. Thus, to take advantage of opportunities, parties must be  able to share data safely and in confidence. Sometimes,  parties wish to share or open up access to data on a  voluntary basis, but experience obstacles due to legal  uncertainty or complexity. The question is always: who  controls the data? Who wants to, and can, have access to  it, and under which conditions? This sometimes results in  companies not exchanging enough data, which may mean  that we end up missing out on opportunities, since more  innovation can take place if companies can easily and  confidently share data, and it also reduces dependence on  specific parties. The government wants the Netherlands to be leading in  sharing data within and between sectors. We already have  a great deal of expertise in this area (legal, technical and  economic) and there are various sectoral initiatives to  promote data sharing, for example in the logistics,  construction, healthcare and agricultural sectors. The  government supports parties in such initiatives. The  European Commission has also recently announced a  number of initiatives to facilitate data sharing within the  EU. In this context, the Netherlands will focus on European  cooperation and the free movement of data within the EU.  Naturally, the parties involved will have to comply with the  relevant rules such as the General Data Protection  Regulation (GDPR) for forms of data sharing in which  personal data are processed.   RESPONSIBLE DATA SHARING   BETWEEN SECTORS The government is exploring the possibilities for an  open, cross-sectoral agreements system for the  responsible and voluntary sharing of data between  companies, with due consideration of the GDPR. A  system of agreements of this kind can ensure safety  and trust in the sharing of data between companies  and sectors. The parliament will be informed of the  results in the autumn of 2018. Exclusive access to data can have a negative impact on  innovation, competition and market structures. In the  financial sector, for example, banks will be obliged to  share account information with other providers, subject to  customer consent. This stimulates competition and  innovation in payments, which will benefit consumers. Mandatory data sharing can thus be a way to promote  competition and innovation. At the same time, mandatory  sharing or opening of datasets can also have a negative  impact on the incentive to collect data or to invest in  business models based on certain data, because the data  can then easily be copied by competitors. In addition,  broader data access may negatively affect data protection  and security. This means that privacy, security, competition  and innovation may end up conflicting with each other.
36 |  VISION ON DATA SHARING In the second half of 2018, the government will  publish its vision on data sharing to promote  innovation and competition. To promote transparency and innovation, the government  aims to ensure that its own information is accessible and  can easily be found, in the form of open data.19 In this  context, the European Commission recently proposed a  revision of the Directive on the re-use of public sector  information. For the Netherlands, it is important here that  any revision should strengthen the open data policy of  governments to stimulate the data economy, as this should   not lead to an increased regulatory and administrative  burden.  NATIONAL DATA AGENDA The government has a lot of general, public data at its  disposal. These data are made easy to find and  accessible in the form of open data. To this end, the  government will focus on (i) real-time access to  dynamic government data, (ii) a substantial increase  in highly valuable datasets and (iii) simplification and  cost reduction in access to and support for applicati ons. This will be further elaborated in the National  Data Agenda ( Nationale Data Agenda ), which will be  published in the autumn of 2018. 6.4 A world-class digital infrastructure The digital infrastructure is a basic prerequisite for the new  economy. Dutch mobile and fixed networks both score  very well at the international level. In the European Digital  Economy and Society index, the Netherlands ranks  number one in the connectivity component,20 with four  fast mobile 4G networks and two high-quality fixed  national networks. A good digital infrastructure enables  citizens and businesses to participate in the digital  economy and society and the creation of new applications  such as in-home care and self-driving cars. In addition, the  excellent digital infrastructure contributes to the business  climate and conditions in the Netherlands, for example by  attracting and retaining economic activity in prime  locations of the Netherlands. 19 This information must also be findable and searchable for future  generations, which is why we wish to ensure that it will be  sustainably archived. 20 EU - DESI: Average of Fixed Broadband, Mobile Broadband, Speed  and Affordability.The government aims to ensure that the Netherlands will  retain its international leadership with world-class fixed  and mobile communication networks. This requires that  private parties continue to invest in networks and that the  needs of different users are met. In this way, the market  can provide high quality connectivity that can serve a wide  variety of demands and is available anytime and anywhere  at competitive prices. OPEN SCIENCE AND OPEN ACCESS Research is becoming increasingly data and software  driven. Open access to scientific publications and  research data from publicly funded research is an  important starting point in this respect. The aim is to  apply FAIR principles in this respect. This means that  research data must be findable, accessible, interoperable  and reusable. The market must lead the way, and the government has a  role where the market fails to reach national ambitions.  The current objective of the government is that, by 2025,  fast mobile 5G technology will be widely available and  everyone will have access to the internet at a fixed location  with a speed of at least 100 megabits per second (Mbps).  This is in line with European objectives. It must also be  mentioned that this goal is a lower limit that applies to  everyone. The expectation is that a large majority of Dutch  households will by that time already have access to the  higher speed of 1 Gigabit per second (Gbps). To this end, it is important to reassess the preconditions.   A Digital Connectivity Action Plan is being developed  comprising the following points: i. Spectrum policy: the government is making sufficient  frequency spectrum available for new wireless  networks, keeping 5G and the needs of companies and  existing users in mind. ii. Local policy: local policies are important for the proper  roll-out of new networks. Examples of this include  requirements on antenna placement and permit  conditions for excavation work for new cables. The  Action Plan indicates whether further transparency or  harmonisation of rules would be desirable. iii. Investments: in order to maintain sufficient incentives  for investments in a market in which two parties are  dominant, the Netherlands has successfully argued in  favour of having sufficient instruments available within  the European telecommunications framework to  enable the regulator, the ACM, to intervene where  necessary. This is intended to safeguard competition  and freedom of choice in the future as well. However,  not all the necessary investments can be made  commercially viable, for example when it comes to 
 | 37connecting households in rural areas. The Action Plan  indicates how the government intends to speed up the  process in rural areas. vi. Continuity: it is important that the telecom networks be  reliable and that, in the event of a breakdown, repairs  be carried out quickly. Sufficient investments must  therefore continue to be made in redundancy and  emergency measures, in order to prevent incidents  from leading to large-scale telecom failures and social  disruption. The Action Plan discusses the role that the  government can play to ensure continuity. v. Innovation: in the coming years, the range of connecti vity should develop to enable digital innovations. Such  innovations are expected to place increasingly specific  and challenging demands on the digital infrastructure.  To this end, it is vital that market parties and other  parties can experiment with new forms of connectivity,  such as 5G. The Action Plan discusses various 5G pilots  and the possibilities for facilitating them. DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY ACTION PLAN Before the summer, the government will present a  Digital Connectivity Action Plan to ensure that, by  2025, fast mobile 5G technology will be widely  available and everyone will have access to the  internet at a fixed location at a speed of at least  100 Mbps. In addition, the expectation is that a large  majority of Dutch households will by that time  already have access to the higher speed of 1 Gbps. 
38 |Chapter 7. Strengthening the resilience of  citizens and organisations Digital security and privacy taken care of Security and trust form the basis for a successful transfor mation to a digital economy and society. They are the  foundation for a good business environment, for our  competitiveness and for the take-up and use of digital  technologies by citizens and businesses. The Netherlands  therefore wants to present itself as a safe place to do  business digitally. In this regard, cybersecurity products  and services are an interesting growth market in which  Dutch businesses can stand out internationally.21 Digitalisation creates new challenges in the areas of  security, privacy and consumer protection. Digital  platforms are sometimes powerful global players, and  malicious parties often operate anonymously from  abroad. The cross-border nature of cybercrime and  cyberterrorism makes effective investigation and prosecu tion difficult. Trust in a digital economy and society hinges  on an effective approach to these problems. This will  require an effort on the part of all the national and  international parties involved. 7.1 A safe and secure digital society Cyber threats in the Netherlands are increasing in all  sectors. For example, cyberattacks on the digital systems  of hospitals and harbours can shut down all or part of  these hospitals and harbours. In our digital society, the  security of citizens, governments and businesses is  currently inadequately organised. Many citizens and  businesses do not appear to be sufficiently digitally  resilient and awareness of cyber threats and protection  measures is usually lacking. As a result, some companies  are hesitant to further digitise processes.  The government, citizens and businesses all have a role to  play with regard to digital security. They must all take  appropriate measures to put their own digital security and  resilience in order. The government holds primarily  responsibility for the fight against crime and the protec tion of national security interests, including continuity of  vital processes, protection of the reliability and confidenti 21 See, for example, the VKA report, ‘Economische kansen voor de  Nederlandse cybersecurity-sector’ (Economic opportunities for the  Dutch cybersecurity sector). https://www.vka.nl/actueel/nieuws/ rapport-vka-economische-kansen-nederlandse-cybersecurity-sector/ .ality of public sector information and protection of the  democratic rule of law.  The government wants citizens and businesses to be able  to use digital applications safely, especially where these  technologies affect not only their own digital security, but  also that of society as a whole. The government is  therefore responsible for setting the right preconditions.  CYBERSECURITY PROBLEMS WITH   THE INTERNET OF THINGS The Internet of Things is growing rapidly and offers  many opportunities, but at the same time is  increasingly posing cybersecurity problems. Hardware  and software vulnerabilities can give malicious users  easy access both to a single device and to the network  to which it is connected, and this can have major  consequences. Consider, for example, the misuse of  hacked devices for DDoS attacks and the theft of  information stored on devices. The Digital Hardware and Software Security Roadmap  contains a broad package of measures to promote the  digital security of hardware and software. This ranges  from discussions with stakeholders about liability in  the event of digitally unsafe hardware and software,  the introduction of CE marking, standards and  mandatory certification at European level to exploring  a testing facility and a supporting cyber hygiene  information campaign. In order to be resilient against cybercrime and digital threats,  it is necessary, with due observance of the legal frameworks,  to share up-to-date and useful information and advice  about vulnerabilities and incidents and how to resolve them.  The National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) supports the  central government and companies that are part of the vital  infrastructure in this respect. In order to also improve the  resilience of the rest of the business community – SMEs and  non-vital businesses – the Digital Trust Centre (DTC) has  been established. In addition, the government is investing in  a substantial expansion of the government’s cyber capacity  and technology – including that of the Ministry of Defence  – in order to be able to play a greater role in protecting the  Netherlands against digital threats. 
 | 39 COMMITMENT TO CYBERSECURITY • Under the coordination of the Minister of Justice  and Security, a Dutch Cyber Security Agenda (NCSA)  has been drawn up. The NCSA aims to ensure that  the Netherlands can safely seize the economic and  social opportunities of digitalisation and protect  national security in the digital domain. The NCSA  comprises the following seven key ambitions: 1.  The Netherlands must have its digital defences in  order. 2.  The Netherlands should contribute to internatio nal peace and security in the digital domain. 3.  The Netherlands should be a leader in promoting  digitally safe hardware and software. 4.  The Netherlands must possess resilient digital  processes and a robust infrastructure. 5.  The Netherlands must erect effective barriers  against cybercrime by means of cybersecurity. 6.  The Netherlands must be a leader in the field of  cybersecurity knowledge development (see also  Chapter 4). 7.  The Netherlands should have an integrated,  public–private approach to cybersecurity. • A Digital Trust Centre will provide companies –  among others via a digital platform – with up-todate information and concrete advice on digital  vulnerabilities and will contribute to a nationwide  system of partnerships for the business community. • The Netherlands is pressing for the rapid adoption  of the Cyber Security Act (CSA) in Brussels. In the  short term, the government will be advocating the  adoption of mandatory certification for specific  product groups. The importance of security by  design will also be considered. In the longer term,  through gradual extension, compulsory certifica tion or compliance with CE marking should be  extended to all internet-connected products. • This year, the Ministry of Defence is renewing its  Cyber Strategy, in line with the Dutch Cyber Security  Strategy. • The broad Agenda for e-Government ( Agenda  Digitale Overheid ) will contain a coherent package of  measures for information security and cybersecurity   in the public administration.IMPACT OF DIGITALISATION IN   THE AREA OF JUSTICE AND SECURITY The use of new technologies by malicious parties is  leading to new forms of crime and security threats. At  the same time, new detection methods and  opportunities to increase safety and security are  emerging. These can be very effective, while  simultaneously raising privacy and ethical issues.  Finding the right balance will require explicit attention.  For example, technological developments mean that  more and more sensors are generating data that may  also be relevant forensically, for example in criminal  investigations or in court cases. Data systems in  vehicles, for example, can provide the police with  good and reliable data in order to determine the  circumstances of an accident.  In the case of the police, the information supply is  also central to enforcement and business operations.  Mobile working has become the norm, in which  regard information and data are of great value.  Digitalisation is a major determinant of the  operational effectiveness of the police. New technologies also offer new opportunities for  risk and crisis communication and emergency  assistance. The most important thing is to serve the  citizen as well as possible. Whereas emergency  communication is now mainly geared to oral contact,  the use of real-time data will change working practice.  Examples include streaming video, allowing people to  directly share relevant data about personsn in need or  about the location of the incident.  Government communication with citizens, for  example during a crisis, is also going through a  process of digitalisation. With resources such as  NL-alert, Amber-alert or Burgernet the government  can provide targeted information to citizens or ask for  help in solving a situation. In the field of justice, technological developments  offer opportunities for new applications and digital  accessibility. The digitalisation of the judicial system  opens up new opportunities for big data applications.  The justice system is cooperating with the scientific  community to investigate how artificial intelligence  can be applied responsibly within the justice system.
40 |COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGNS The communication campaigns for citizens and SMEs  will be linked to new policies for digital security and  privacy protection. Concrete advice, a framework for  action and measures will be used to make people  resilient and to contribute to behavioural change.  Campaigns such as Alert Online, Veilig internetten.nl  (on safe use of the internet) and Boefproof (anti-theft  campaign) will be better coordinated governmentwide and, where possible, brought together. 7.2  Protection and control of personal  data The European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)  lays a new foundation for the protection of privacy. The  GDPR entered into force on 25 May 2018 and gives citizens  more rights and organisations more obligations to handle  personal data with care.22 However, many citizens are still  insufficiently aware of the online processing of their data.  Citizens often have to give their consent to the processing  of their data, but it is by no means always clear to them  what exactly happens to their data. Moreover, citizens  often do not have an effective choice when it comes to  viewing information or purchasing an online service.  The government wants people to be able to trust that their  privacy is also well protected online. This is a joint task for  governments, companies and civil society organisations,  who must ensure that people’s rights and obligations are  clarified and work on frameworks for responsible data use.  In order to inform parties that collect personal data about  the GDPR and to help them implement the GDPR, the  General Data Protection Regulation Manual ( Handleiding  Algemene Verordening Gegevensbescherming ) was recently  published. In addition, the Dutch Data Protection  Authority (Dutch DPA) has made a ten-step plan available  as well as a personal data protection rulebook.  Consultations have also been initiated with, for example,  industry organisations, to help companies with the  implementation. 22 When we talk about the processing of data in this strategy, the  processing of these data, as far as personal data is concerned, must  of course comply with the rules set by the GDPR. On the basis of the  GDPR, the General Data Protection Regulation Implementation Act  (Uitvoeringswet Algemene verordening gegevensbescherming – UAVG ) has  now been implemented, which, as far as the GDPR leaves room for  this, builds on the standards framework from the 1995 Privacy  Directive and the repealed Dutch Personal Data Protection Act (Wbp).In addition, the government wants to increase citizens’  own control over personal data in order to further  promote the protection of privacy. Clear frameworks  (agreements systems) for personal data management will  be formulated during this government’s term of office, in  agreement with the GDPR. The intended result is that: • People can be confident that they can have easy and  secure access to their personal data and its use by third  parties, and that, where possible, they can correct,  delete and use or reuse this data. • Data controllers or administrators can contribute  responsibly via agreements systems to the disclosure of  personal data. • Service and app builders know how to develop products  that help people manage their personal data  responsibly. • Government records can actually be reused, so that  governments, market parties or civil society organisati ons can develop services with them, to the extent  permitted under the GDPR. GREATER CONTROL OVER ONE’S   OWN HEALTH DATA. What does my pacemaker know about me? Even your  doctor sometimes does not have the data. It is  important to be able to access data that concerns you.  After all, having a say in what happens to your own  data provides greater control. It is also important to  not be pressured into providing data if there is no  need to do so.  MedMij’s goal is to provide everyone who wishes,  with their own health data in a single personal digital  health environment. Such an app or website should  be able to communicate securely and reliably with the  information systems of healthcare providers. MedMij  establishes rules for this. This will enable patients to  view and manage personal data that are stored in  different places in one complete overview. What’s  more, the patient can securely and confidently share  these data with a healthcare provider, whenever and  wherever they want.
 | 41In addition to the GDPR, the European Commission has  proposed a new ePrivacy Regulation (ePR). This Regulation  lays down specific privacy rules for the electronic commu nications sector. The confidentiality of communications for  traditional telecom services (the ‘privacy of electronic  communications’) will be extended to communication  services via the internet (such as WhatsApp), so that the  confidentiality of digital communication will be more  broadly guaranteed. The cookie provision – which also  applies to the Internet of Things – has been made more  user-friendly in the proposal: requirements are set for  browsers and other software that make it easier to grant  permission and offer clearer choices. The aim is to provide  good online privacy protection and promote innovative  and secure online services and applications. STRENGTHENING PRIVACY • The government is actively involved in the  development and implementation of an ambitious  European ePrivacy Regulation, in line with the  GDPR, that extends the ‘privacy of electronic  communications’ to internet communication  services and introduces cookie measures that make  it easier to grant permission for data storage and  use, with clearer choices. The government will also  take account of the recently adopted motion by  Verhoeven, et al.23 • As announced in the coalition agreement, the  government is committed to strengthening privacy  between citizens. This autumn, the government will  send a letter to parliament outlining the govern ment’s vision of how the privacy between citizens  can be strengthened and what measures the  government intends to take to this end.24 • During this government’s term, the ‘Taking Control  of Data’ ( Regie op Gegevens ) programme will provide  clear frameworks for personal data management,  in agreement with the GDPR. A first draft of the  Uniform Set of Requirements for Personal Data  Management will be published at the end of 2018. 23 Parliamentary Papers 2150133, No. 711. 24 This will also include the government’s response to the proposals in  the initiative policy document of the member of parliament  Koopmans, on mutual privacy (Parliamentary Papers II 2017/18,  34926, numbers 1-2). 
42 |7.3  Appropriate protection when buying  online Consumer rights apply not only in brick and mortar shops,  but also on the internet when consumers buy a product or  service. The government believes that consumers should  be able to make informed decisions about products they  buy online, for example through understandable  consumer information, fair terms and conditions,  transparent pricing, reliable customer service and  complaint handling and online access to dispute resolution  mechanisms. The government has commissioned a study into the  problems consumers experience when purchasing on  digital platforms. This study shows that a large majority of  Dutch people (70%) purchased a product or service via a  digital platform last year and almost half (48%) sometimes  offered something for sale. Consumers see the conve nience and greater choice on platforms as the main  advantage in this respect.  Approximately a quarter of consumers experience  problems when using platforms. This concerns in parti cular a failure to deliver a product, or to deliver it on time,  or the poor quality of a product. More than half of the  platform users claim to be very poorly or very poorly  informed about the protections offered by consumer law.  Interest representatives of consumers and producers have  likewise noticed that there is a lack of clarity when buying  on platforms. In addition, consumers are increasingly buying products  from a country outside the EU via a platform. However,  consumers are not always aware that they are buying from  a supplier outside the EU. Moreover, there is a lack of  transparency and questions are raised about the safety  and quality of such products. For example, consumers may  have to pay additional import or customs fees, or they  may have to wait a long time for delivery. It is also  sometimes unclear what rights consumers have if the  product proves to be defective.  The European Commission is also mindful of the chal lenges in the area of consumer policy. In order to address  these new challenges, the Commission has presented a  package of measures. This package of measures moder nises existing consumer legislation, inter alia to better  reflect digital developments in society. As markets continue to evolve and change rapidly,  consumer law must be able to continue to adapt and  develop if it is to remain relevant and provide solutions to  new problems faced by consumers. The government will  continue to monitor developments in consumer markets  in order to identify new problems and develop behavioural  scientific insights to support policy-making.   TRANSPARENCY IN ONLINE   PURCHASES • A consumer must know whom to address as the  counterparty in the event of questions or problems.  This means that consumers should be informed  who the contracting party is and whether the  provider is acting as a business or as a consumer.  The government will therefore enter into discus sions with interest representatives of consumers,  producers and platforms to see how this can best  be arranged.  • The government wants consumers to be better  informed about the important rights they have  when purchasing via an online platform, and will  therefore explore the possibilities for communica tion with various parties. • Negotiations on new EU legislation will focus on  enhanced disclosure requirements and increased  transparency on platforms regarding the identity of  the provider.  • The government will investigate which problems  consumers encounter when purchasing products  that are (or may be) part of the Internet of Things. It  will also examine whether the monitoring of the  Internet of Things is effectively organised to ensure  that problems are adequately addressed. • The government will send parliament the study on  the problems people experience with their  purchases on digital platforms, accompanied by a  response, in the second half of 2018.
 | 43Chapter 8.  Fundamental rights and ethics in  the digital age Trust in the digital future Digitalisation affects the values and relationships in our  society and the way in which we interact with each other.  The use of new technologies and applications raises  ethical questions and can have important implications for  public values and fundamental rights. How, for example,  can we prevent the use of big data from leading to the  exclusion of specific groups? To what extent should  algorithms be made explainable and transparent? To what  extent should persuasive technologies be allowed to limit  the autonomy of the individual? How can human dignity  be safeguarded in the use of robots? To what extent does  personalisation of the news restrict diversity of opinion  and free elections? Moreover, the digital transformation requires extra  attention for equal treatment. The use of algorithms  makes it possible to distinguish between groups of people  on the basis of a variety of criteria, which until recently  was practically impossible. The opportunities that this  offers for providers of public and private services must go  hand in hand with actively preventing unjustified discrimi nation and unequal treatment of, from a legal point of  view, similar cases. TRUST Trust is the foundation for the successful digital  transformation and for capitalising its economic and  social opportunities. Residents and businesses must  trust that technology companies cannot unilaterally  dictate developments and trust that digitalisation is  safe. For the government, it goes without saying that  public values and fundamental rights such as security,  privacy protection, self-determination, solidarity and  fair competition are paramount and respected in the  digital age as well.The government considers safeguarding public values and  human rights to be of crucial importance also in this digital  age, and therefore sets the relevant frameworks and  implements the appropriate policy. In experiments,  government authorities can learn from the potential  positive and negative effects of digital technologies and  applications and how to address possible risks. The government wants ethical standards and fundamental  rights to be included in algorithms and the use of data.  This is by no means always the case, nor is there always  accountability for how this is done. The government is of  the opinion that companies also have an important  responsibility in this respect. AUTOMATED DECISION-MAKING The advantage of automated decision-making is that  it leads to more efficient processes. The need for this  and the possibilities for it are on the rise. At the same  time, automated decision-making also involves risks,  such as the risk of discrimination. The GDPR therefore  prohibits automated decision-making. There are,  however, a few exceptions to this rule. For example,  this prohibition does not apply if the national  legislator has expressly authorised it and provides for  appropriate measures to protect the rights of data  subjects.  The government is of the opinion that, for the time  being, limited use should be made of this right to  derogate. For this reason, the General Data Protection  Regulation Implementation Act ( Uitvoeringswet  Algemene verordening gegevensbescherming – UAVG )  provides only a general basis for forms of automated  decision-making that take place on the basis of  strictly personal characteristics. In view of the  associated risks, automated decision-making on the  basis of group characteristics requires a specific legal  basis with sufficient guarantees to limit the risks.
44 |  RESEARCH INTO ALGORITHMS AND  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE • Around the summer, the government will respond  to a study into the relationship between algorithms  and fundamental rights, carried out by Utrecht  University. In addition, the Research and  Documentation Centre ( Wetenschappenlijk Onderzoek-  en Documentatiecentrum – WODC ) of the Ministry of  Justice and Security is conducting research into the  legal aspects of algorithms capable of making  decisions independently. • Under the direction of the Ministry of the Interior  and Kingdom Relations, the government will set up  an interdepartmental policy group to deal with the  ethical issues surrounding digitalisation and, where  necessary, propose concrete actions. • The government has asked the Scientific Council for  Government Policy ( Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het  Regeringsbeleid – WRR ) for advice on the opportuni ties and threats associated with artificial intelli gence. The WRR was asked to indicate which  instruments are available to parties such as the  government and the business community to  facilitate the positive effects of artificial intelligence  and to mitigate the negative effects. Within the  new national innovation programme concerning  artificial intelligence (see Chapter 4), attention will  also be paid to the transparency and explainability  of algorithms. • In the autumn of 2018, the Minister for Legal  Protection will publish a letter on the significance of  developments in algorithms and artificial intelli gence for the justice system.8.1 Cooperation and dialogue The government wants to discuss new ethical issues with  the people concerned. Through dialogues, we involve broad  groups of citizens, companies, government authorities and  parties from civil society. In this way, we stimulate  awareness and understanding about the effects of new  digital technologies on public values. The Ministry of Justice  and Security, for example, organises dialogues with  representatives of privacy interests about how the govern ment wants to take advantage of the opportunities offered  by big data and the standards it applies in this respect.25 Not only privacy and security, but also other rights,  including fundamental rights, such as the right to free  access of information, are important in this respect. For  example, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science  organised round tables on the personalisation of news,  freedom of information and independence of journalism.26 INCREASING TRUST TOGETHER The government – in cooperation with the business  and scientific community – stimulates and organises  dialogues on technological developments in order to  increase trust and to clearly define the boundaries of  developments. COOPERATION OF UNIVERSITIES OF  TECHNOLOGY IN ETHICS RESEARCH Within the 4TU.Centre for Ethics and Technology, the  Dutch universities of technology (Delft, Eindhoven  and Twente) are working on research into ethical  issues in the development, use and regulation of  technology. This research focuses on interdisciplinary  and applied research in ethics and technology, and on  teaching in this field. The pooling of ethics and  technology resources is in line with the growing need  for balanced, high quality and comprehensive  reflection and assessment of both moral and political  issues relating to science and technology. 25  Parliamentary Papers II 2016–2017, 26 643, No. 426. 26  Parliamentary Papers II 2016–2017, 32 827, No. 116. 
 | 458.2  Reliable information and content on  online platforms Illegal content Ensuring a free, safe and just society is a core task of the  government. For this reason, the Netherlands has adopted  a targeted approach to illegal activities (online and  otherwise). In tackling terrorism, child pornography,  discrimination, illegal arms trade and copyright violations,  considerable attention is paid to the online component.  The government attaches importance to the rapid and  sustainable removal of illegal online content. In this  context, the possibility of removing illegal content from  online forums remains essential. The government sees  added value in a uniform European approach or method  for reporting and removing the various forms of illegal  content, because of the common interest in effectively and  efficiently combating illegal content. However, this  approach must be flexible enough to respond to new  developments, focus specifically on the distribution of  illegal content online, be accompanied by sufficient  safeguards in terms of, for example, transparency and  human oversight and take account of the subsequent  criminal proceedings against the distributors of illegal  content.  The government takes a positive view of measures taken  by platform companies themselves to combat illegal  content. It is impossible for public authorities to be  present on every platform at all times to maintain public  order. At the same time, information needed by public  services to carry out their tasks can increasingly be found  in the digital domain and in particular on platforms. In  order to safeguard public order and security and protect  vulnerable citizens, it is essential that signals given in the  digital domain be picked up and identified in good time by  the relevant authorities, who depend in part on the  providers of digital services, such as the major social  media platforms. As a result, the relationship between public authorities and  digital service providers such as platform companies is  changing. The platform companies are in the best position  to observe what is happening on the platforms and to  intervene in accordance with regulation. The government  considers it important in this respect that measures taken  by private parties come with sufficient guarantees, for  example related to transparency and human oversight,  and do not infringe fundamental rights such as the right to  freedom of expression and privacy.27 27 Parliamentary Paper 22 112, No. 2420.Disinformation The government attaches great importance to an open  information society. Our democratic rule of law and open  society are built on foundations such as a free press,  freedom of expression, free and fair elections and the rule  of law. New technologies facilitate the dissemination of  disinformation and the influencing of public opinion. This  can undermine people’s trust in public institutions and has  the potential to damage our democratic rule of law.  Protecting these is of the utmost importance. What is relevant in this regard is that the distribution of  fake news, although undesirable, cannot necessarily be  considered criminal online content that can be equated  with so-called hate speech or discrimination.28 It goes  without saying that the government will closely monitor  the activities of the European Commission with regard to  fake news, online disinformation and other platform  risks.29   JOURNALISM IN THE DIGITAL AGE • In the coalition agreement, extra funds were made  available to support investigative journalism. • Before the summer, the results of research and a  round table discussion on the personalisation of  the news supply will be shared with parliament. 28  See, for example, Parliamentary Paper 26 643, No. 508. 29  http://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/initiatives/ares-2017-5489364 . 
46 |Chapter 9. Moving forward This strategy contains the overarching vision and the  actions we will take together to ensure that we become  the leader in this field in Europe. It describes the main  features, the principles and the conditions.  In a number of separate agendas, the government will  elaborate further on specific ambitions from the coalition  agreement and this digitalisation strategy. The following  short-term items can already be mentioned: • At the end of April, the Minister of Justice and Security  published the Dutch Cyber Security Agenda and the  State Secretary for Economic Affairs and Climate Policy  published the ‘Roadmap for digitally secure hardware  and software’ (‘ Roadmap digitaal veilige hard- en software’ ).  • Before the summer, the State Secretary for Economic  Affairs and Climate Policy will launch the ‘Accelerating  the digitalisation of SMEs’ programme (‘ Versnelling  digitalisering mkb’ ) (as part of the Action Agenda on  SMEs). • Before the summer, the Minister of Social Affairs and  Employment will present an Action Plan for a break through in the field of lifelong development. • Before the summer, the State Secretary for Economic  Affairs and Climate Policy will publish a Digital  Connectivity Action Plan and a letter to Parliament  entitled ‘Noticeably better regulation’ (‘ Merkbaar betere  regelgeving’ ).  • Around the summer, under the direction of the State  Secretary for the Interior and Kingdom Relations, an  ambitious, broad agenda will appear for the further  digitalisation of public administration.  • In the second half of 2018, the Minister of Defence will  publish a new Defence Cyber Strategy. • In the second half of 2018, the State Secretary for  Economic Affairs and Climate Policy will publish a vision  on data sharing. • Before the end of 2018, the Minister of Infrastructure  and Water Management will send a Digital Transport  Strategy, focusing on improving the interconnectedness  of the transport sector. A letter about Smart Mobility  developments on the road will follow before the  summer.  • In the first half of 2019, the Minister for Foreign Trade  and Development Cooperation will publish an agenda  on digitalisation in the are of Foreign Trade and  Development Cooperation. This strategy provides the basis for a government-wide  approach to strengthen coherence and cooperation in the  field of digitalisation. At the same time, this global  transformation is accelerating and will continue to create  new opportunities and raise new questions. We therefore  need to be flexible and be able to adjust priorities in good  time.  In order to keep this strategy up-to-date, we will review it  annually where necessary. To use appropriate ICT  terminology: the strategy ‘is in permanent beta’. This  review will also be central to the annual Digital Summit  that the government will organise for the first time in early  2019 in cooperation with scientists, businesses, civil  society organisations and local and regional authorities.30   GOING FORWARD: DIGITAL   SUMMIT 2019 & PERMANENT BETA The government will review the strategy annually so  that we can respond to new developments. In this context, we will organise a Digital Summit at  the beginning of 2019 in cooperation with the  business and scientific community and civil society  organisations. In order to better keep track of the digital transforma tion, we are looking at the possibilities of a monitor. 30 Cf. the motion of Veldman et al. (Parliamentary Papers 34775-XIII,  No. 67)
