Responsible AI –  Maturing from  theory to practice 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 2 As awareness and scrutiny of the risks associated with AI  increase, building responsible technology has become a  paramount concern in organizations across all sectors.  Globally, responsible AI is maturing from a “best practice” to  the high-level principles and guidance necessary to drive  system-level change and engender trust. Regulators are  also taking notice, advocating for regulatory frameworks  around AI, including increased data protections,  governance and accountability measures. Foreword  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 2
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 3In 2017 we began working on topics related to responsible AI, formally  launching the Responsible AI toolkit in 2019. The suite of customizable  frameworks, tools and processes was designed to help clients harness the  power of AI in an ethical and responsible manner. Accompanying the launch  was a survey designed to understand the key priorities, concerns and maturity  of organizations attempting to deploy AI responsibly. At the time, companies  were relatively new to deploying AI. Being less aware of the risks, they  implemented inconsistent practices and paused at points in their journey.  Since then, entire industries have enabled better end-to-end solutions for  Responsible AI1. We surveyed over 1,000 executives across the US, UK, Japan  and India to understand how views have changed — and how priorities have  shifted for organizations.  We reprised some of the questions from our last  Responsible AI survey in 2018   and asked how the impact of recent events, such as COVID-19 and regulatory  focus, has shifted priorities and heightened awareness of risks.  At a time when quick decision-making was needed, the rapid spread of  COVID-19 caught governments, businesses and citizens off-guard. This  prompted many businesses to accelerate AI use and innovation. Today, only  5% of our survey respondents do not currently use AI; last year, that number  was 47%. The ability to operationalize AI effectively — what we call AI maturity  — is key to both maintaining progress among leaders and closing the gap for  companies that have yet to start their responsible AI journey.  The survey results showed where companies were grouped among the three  levels of AI maturity:  25%  companies with fully  embedded AI 55%  companies at the  experimental stage of  AI implementation 20%  companies still exploring  AI without having  implemented anything  1 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9377738 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 4 While a quarter of companies have fully embraced AI, and more than half are  experimenting, the ability to deploy at scale varies. Our research shows those  with an embedded AI strategy can more reliably deploy applications at scale  with increased adoption across the business. As a result of COVID-19, larger  companies (>$1bn) are significantly more likely to increase their use of AI  (38%) explore new use cases for AI (39%) and train more employees to use AI  (35%). The accelerated rate at which companies are adopting AI and  embedding it into their organizations creates a vital need for responsible and  ethical AI.  Organizations in early stages of AI adoption might be quick to look for technical  fixes to potential concerns. However, those that are more mature in their  adoption curve rely on a comprehensive, values-driven and tech-enabled  approach to governance. In this whitepaper, you can explore the market trends  surrounding ethics, risks and governance in the AI space and get a view of the  rapidly changing regulatory landscape. In each section, you find key takeaways  from each maturity phase along the AI adoption curve. You can also learn about  some of the emerging topics and concepts that organizations across the globe  can leverage in their pursuit of responsible AI.  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 4
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 5  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 5Updates to our  responsible AI  framework 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 6Over the past two years, our views on implementing AI responsibly have evolved, based  both on survey data and on our experience with clients, governments, not-for-profits  and academia. For instance, there is a greater focus on helping organizations   operationalize AI ethics, moving past principles to concrete practices for developers,   users, and business teams.  We also added more tangible practices surrounding data  ethics, cybersecurity, process transparency, risk management, privacy governance,  safety and sustainability.  Strategy  Data and AI ethics  Is your development, use and oversight of data  and AI solutions ethical and moral? Policy and regulation  As the regulatory landscape continues to evolve,  how are you positioning your AI to meet future  compliance requirements? Are you considering  localized differences?  Control  Risk Management  Do your risk detection and  mitigation practices enable the  identification of emerging risks  and harms across AI  development  and deployment? Governance  Do you have robust governance  models for your AI system? Do  they enable oversight with clear  roles, responsibilities and  requirements, as well as  mechanisms for traceability and  ongoing assessment? Compliance  How are you anticipating future  compliance, creating  organizational policies and  communicating change to stay  ahead of current data  protection, privacy regulations  and industry standards? Performance and security  Bias and fairness  Is your AI fair? How are you  defining that fairness? Interpretability and  explainability  Can you explain both the  overall decision-making and the  individual predictions generated  by your AI? Robustness  Is your AI system stable? Does  it consistently meet performance  requirements and behave as  intended?  Privacy  How will your AI system protect  and manage privacy, and how  will you respond to consumers’  \evolving expectations? Safety  Is your AI safe for society? What  are its potential impacts on  users, and is it able to prevent  unintended or harmful actions? Security  What are the security risks and  implications that should be  managed to maintain integrity of  algorithms and underlying data,  while reducing the possibility of  malicious attacks? Figure 1 – PwC’s responsible AI framework 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 7 Ethics for AI is still  young, but adoption  is growing  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 7
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 8AI is becoming essential across industries to help boost human productivity and  decision-making, but do the benefits to the bottom line outweigh the potential impact to  society? We have seen AI’s disruptive potential, as well as negative consequences from  its underuse, misuse and abuse.2 Consumers and the media have drawn attention to  biased recruitment3 and financial tools4, concerns around discrimination5 and more,  raising awareness of the moral dilemmas surrounding the deployment of AI6. Developers,  users and organizations need clear guidance and principles in order to apply AI to  real-world problems responsibly and to handle all identified moral implications.  The landscape of ethical AI principles that PwC has researched is expansive and rich, but  there are commonalities. We took more than 100 sets of ethical principles — amounting  to 200 in total — and consolidated them into nine core ethical AI principles.  The epistemic principles  Interpretability  (Explainability, transparency,  provability)  An AI system should be able to  explain its model decision-  making overall, as well as what  drives an individual prediction  to different stakeholders.  Reliability, robustness,  security  AI systems should be  developed so that they will  operate reliably and safely over  long periods of time using the  right models and datasets. The general ethical AI principles  Safety  Throughout their operational  lifetimes,  AI systems should not  compromise the physical safety  or mental integrity  of humans. Human agency  The degree of human  intervention required as part of  AI solutions’ decision-making or  operations should be dictated  by the level of perceived ethical  risk severity.  Fairness  The development of AI should  result in individuals within  similar groups being treated in  a fair manner, without  favoritism or discrimination,  and without causing or  resulting in harm. AI should  also maintain respect for the  individuals behind the data and  refrain from using datasets that  contain discriminatory biases. Data privacy  Individuals should have the  right to manage their data  when it’s used to train and run  AI solutions, as well as  managing how that data is  reused for other purposes  Lawfulness  and compliance  All the stakeholders in the  design of an AI system must  always act in accordance with  the law and all relevant  regulatory regimes.  Beneficial AI  The development of AI should  promote and reflect the  common good, such as  sustainability, cooperation and  openness. Accountability  All stakeholders of AI systems  are responsible for the moral  implications of their use and  misuse. There must also be a  clearly identifiable accountable  party, be it an individual or an  organizational entity.  2https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5  3https://hbr.org/2019/05/all-the-ways-hiring-algorithms-can-introduce-bias  4https://hbr.org/2020/11/ai-can-make-bank-loans-more-fair  5https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/ai-blog-human-bias-and-discrimination-in-ai-systems/  6https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/10/ethical-concerns-mount-as-ai-takes-bigger-decision-making-role/  7https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2021/06/ethical-principles-for-ai/Figure 2 – Ethical AI principles 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 9 During the investment stage, executive and technical leadership support is critical for  operationalizing ethics in AI in a proactive and sustainable way. 69% of CEOs and 64% of  IT professionals are fairly confident about ethically driven AI investments. A majority of  both C-suite (55%) and non-C-suite (47%) executives are confident that the ethics of AI  aligns with organizational value, and that percentage is much higher (81% and 71%  respectively) in organizations that have fully embraced AI. While releasing principles is a great first step, those principles need to be applied. Even  with high expectations around ethical principles, there are few consistent approaches to  put them into practice. Still, our survey shows that organizations are trying. Over half of  the companies surveyed have some formal policies or principles to address ethical issues  that arise from using AI, with nearly a quarter having some guidance and policies in  place. This trend is consistent across countries we surveyed. One in 5 companies has an  ethical framework in place for AI development and use. Encouragingly, those that are fully  embracing AI in the organization are almost twice as likely to have a formal ethical  framework in place (41% versus 21%).  C-Suite  Base:711 Non-C-Suite  Base:307  1 %1 % 27% 27%23%21%1%1% We are actively incorporating ethical  principles in our day-to-day operations  We have some ethical policies that  relate to business practices We strongly encourage ethical  practices, but do not have formal  policies or procedures around  AI ethics We have an ethical framework for  AI development and use that is  embedded in our policies and  procedures This doesn’t really apply to our use of AI Don’t know Figure 3 – State of operationalizing ethical principles  Figure 4 – Support for operationalization of ethical principle by job type  Definitely Reasonably well To a limited degree Not at all 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 10Perhaps the greatest barrier to operationalizing ethics in AI is an inconsistent and linear  approach. Often the initiatives launched — from AI codes of conduct to ethical boards or  frameworks — are considered in isolation, which limits their ability to work effectively.  While codes of conduct (63%) and impact assessments (52%) are popular tools with  executives across different-size organizations, providing ethical training, using ethical  boards and other means of interventions vary significantly according to organizational  size and AI adoption maturity. In fact, large companies with high AI maturity use are  significantly more likely to have an ethical board (60%), carry out impact assessments  (62%) and provide ethical training (47%), revealing these to be the leading practices  required to enable responsible AI.  But where do we go from here? Building on the promising developments we have seen  across sectors and organizations of all sizes, we can acknowledge that operationalizing  ethics requires resource commitment and incentives in order to deliver responsible  outcomes with AI. The operationalizing of adherence to ethics can also have a massive  contribution to the acceleration of AI adoption and to return on investment (ROI).   Total  Impact of COVID on the organization is slowing AI investment 1st Concerns with the reliability of AI applications performance over time * 2nd Inadequate technology infrastructure to support cloud-based AI applications 3rd Lack of the right AI technical and management talents 4th Lack of data or poor-quality data to use in AI 5th Concerns with data privacy * 6th Lack of trust that an AI investment will deliver the expected returns 7th Lack of coordination needed to make AI successful 8th Takes too long to demonstrate the value of AI 9th Lack of sufficient AI budget 10th Legal concerns about our responsibility if there is an AI failure * 11th Lack of understanding of how AI models/applications make decisions 12th Lack of appropriate AI governance structures and frameworks * 13th Algorithmic bias or other ethical concerns * 14th Lack of sufficient data management policies 15th Lack of AI-specific controls 16thFigure 5 – Challenges to AI adoption (* ethical principles challenges) 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 11•While AI ethics relates to the ethical vision surrounding the use, development and  objectives of AI systems, responsible AI is the multidisciplinary domain needed to  translate this vision into practical guidance.  •Ethical AI frameworks should be consistent with international human rights law8 to  support not only moral and legal accountability, but also the development of  “human-centric” AI for the “common good.”  •The alternative to a piecemeal AI ethics approach (focused on individual initiatives like  codes of conduct, ethical boards, ethical training and impact assessments) is a  systematic overview that considers a variety of ethical AI interventions. (See figure 6.)  Initiative Description  Value statement Having a strong ethical vision for AI, driven by the C-suite, represents the foundation for a  fair, transparent, beneficial, safe, robust outcome with AI.  Principles and  codes  of conduct The ethical principles defined by organizational values should be translated in  organizational policies, codes of conduct and frameworks to allow for operationalizing  those principles.  External  ethics boards Ethical boards are part of the ethical decision-making through which ethical issues can be  escalated, tensions can be managed and precedents can be set.  Culture of ethics Cultures are at the heart of this change and where ethical skills, knowledge and behavior  should be recognized, rewarded and appreciated. Proper incentives and rewards  schemes should be in place to stimulate ethical behavior.  Education  and training Formal ethical training programs and curriculas should be embraced, along with other  activities that will educate individuals about ethical thinking, analysis and reasoning.  These include community practice, events, book clubs, team debates and hackathons.  Reporting/  advice channels Having appropriate means and ways for employees to receive advice regarding ethical  dilemmas or to report breaches around AI and data can help identify potential ethical  issues and solve them before they escalate.  Product  development  and design Ethical decision-making and actions should be operationalized at product level, with  development process ethically aligned, ethical pit stops, and check and balances  embedded at every step of the process to allow for the translation of principles into norms  and the norms into design and governance requirements.  Periodic  assessments Periodic audits are necessary to assess the performance of AI in terms of fairness, safety  and reliability, and where relevant areas comply with internal and external standards. Takeaways  8https://tech.humanrights.gov.au/Figure 6 – Ecosystem of ethical AI interventions 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 12  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 12The risks of AI are a  priority for businesses 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 13Appreciation for AI ethics is growing in parallel with awareness of AI risks. This makes  sense as many AI risks are in some sense ethical risks. Our survey indicated  organizations are increasingly prioritizing AI risk identification and accountability, mainly  by adopting an enterprise approach to AI risk mitigation. In fact, more than a third of  companies (37%) have in place — and communicate — a strategy and policies to tackle  AI risk. This is a stark increase from 2019’s 18%. Another quarter of companies have an  enterprise approach to AI risk that is not only communicated, but also standardized.  The taxonomy of AI risks includes those at the application level — like performance,  control and security risks — as well as those at the broader ecosystem level — including  enterprise, societal and economic risks. Some of the more prominent and visible risks are  those impacting performance, which include poor accuracy and the presence of errors  stemming from poor data quality, bias, overfitting or inadequate testing procedures9. 9https://www.techuk.org/resource/with-great-power-comes-great-responsibility-the-importance-of-proactive-ai-risk-management.htmlCurrently, how are AI risks identified in your organization? Figure 7 – Focus on AI risk identification by maturity level  Organization Maturity Overall  comparison  No formal approach to AI risk evaluation  Scattered silo based approach to AI risk  Strategy and policies to tackle AI risk are in place  and communicated An enterprise approach to AI risk has been  developed, communicated and standardised  AI risk management and internal controls are fully  embedded and automated 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 14Our study also shows that sensitivity to the topic of bias varies across countries. The  share of companies that declare algorithmic bias as a primary focus is higher in India  (48%) and the US (39%) where the public debate is significant and the population has a  complex racial and ethnic composition.  Bias is often cited together with opaqueness, an inability to understand how the system  makes a decision, as the main concerns that hinder AI adoption and responsible use.  Opacity emerges from the growing complexity of algorithms and techniques, which can  result in poor understanding of how applications function, their most important  characteristics and their causal effects. Lack of transparency and poor communication  can create risks by misleading users and jeopardizing the trust in an organization.  Algorithmic bias is a primary concern for many organizations, partially due to emerging  regulatory frameworks, media and consumer attention on discrimination, and consequent  high reputational risk, as well as a desire to “do the right thing.” Respondents to our  survey agree: 36% say algorithmic bias is a primary risk focus area, and 56% of  respondents believe they can address bias risks adequately. Maturing companies  embrace algorithmic bias as a primary focus (nearly 60% of AI leaders) as they gain more  tangible experience in developing AI and awareness of issues around AI risks. Mature  organizations also place a higher importance on the Fairness principle (5th place versus  8th place for less mature firms).  Over the last 12 months, has your organization taken specific account of algorithmic bias  (systems creating unfair outcomes, such as privileging one group over another, including  gender, race or ethnicity, etc.) for your AI solutions? Figure 8 – Focus on bias by maturity level Organization Maturity Overall  comparison  Definitely a primary focus Unsure Enough for our purposes 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 15Tackling these challenges is a complex process entailing technical tools, robust  processes, and, at times, a trade-off between performance and explainability. In this  case, our survey respondents agree: Only 27% claimed they definitely had the ability to  explain or justify the decision made by a model, while 41% could explain reasonably well  and 30% could explain to a limited degree.  The picture changes if we analyse the differences across the maturity levels  of AI adoption: When AI is fully embraced, half of the companies can definitely explain  their decision, while only a fifth of less-mature organizations can do the same. Across the  sectors, companies in Health industries are well above average (36% of respondents  state “definitely” versus 27% of all respondents) on the explainability maturity, likely due  to the high severity of potential harm connected to wrong decisions in healthcare.  If asked, would you be able to explain or justify a decision made by an AI in your business unit?  Your selection  Once an AI system has been developed and tested, and its performance is found  acceptable for its purpose, the real challenge is to enable performance stability over time.  Our survey respondents are very clear about that: “Reliability, robustness and security”  ranks first or second place between the ethical principles across all sectors and all  maturity levels, and it is identified as the second inhibitor to AI adoption — about 10% of  the respondents selected it. If asked, would you be able to explain or justify a decision made by an AI in your  business unit? Figure 9 – Focus on explainability by maturity level  Organization Maturity Overall  comparison  Definitely  Reasonably well To a limited degree  Not at all 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 16This brings up another risk category for AI systems: security risks. While some of these  risks may be comparable with those of other IT systems, AI increases both their  probability and severity. Some security risks can emerge directly as a result of the AI  techniques used. For example, adversarial attacks on machine learning models can  maliciously induce an AI system to misclassify or incorrectly predict something — like  convincing a computer it is seeing a toaster when it is actually looking at a banana10. And  data poisoning can maliciously compromise data sources used for training so that an AI  system begins to act unexpectedly11.  Moreover, don’t underestimate the risks posed by the use of open source software.  Although many open source systems can be reliable tools, there may be issues with  stability and reliability over time because these tools are designed so that almost anyone  can contribute to them and make changes. Consequently, the software may look different  from one moment to the next, which impacts how organizations assess the risks of these  tools.  While survey respondents indicated that safety was a primary concern, only more mature  organizations reported that they had the ability to detect and then shut down a  malfunctioning system. In fact, half of the AI leaders of mature organizations feel very  confident about this capability, while only around 20% of AI leaders of less-mature  organizations feel the same way.  10https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/4/8/18297410/ai-tesla-self-driving-cars-adversarial-machine-learning  11https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1802/1802.07228.pdfCurrently, how confident are you in your organization’s ability to detect and then shut down a  malfunctioning AI system in a timely manner, i.e., before any serious problems are caused? Figure 10 – Focus on safety by maturity level Organization Maturity Overall  comparison  3%1% 10% 4% Very Enough Somewhat  Not at all 13%
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 17Performance is not the only risk area that should be top of mind for AI. For example, our  survey shows that AI leaders recognise the skills mismatch in  the current workforce as a primary concern: The lack of the right AI technical and  management talent always ranks in the top five concerns across all territories, sectors  and different maturity levels. The skills gap carries significant risks for the workforce in  terms of job displacement and disqualifying tasks, but it also increases the risk of poor  quality AI systems and difficulties managing third parties.  Broader organizational-level risks stem from AI’s potential for automation and economic  advantages, as well as from the application-level risks described earlier. These include  enterprise risks, such as reputational and financial loss, risks for non-compliance with  legal requirements, discrimination, misalignment with corporate and societal values, and  the management of third parties and partners.  Ultimately, the vulnerability of certain scenarios and the priority of risks vary by company,  industry and type of use case. For example, risks stemming from poor reliability and  stability over time are highly important in the health sector, while the public sector should  be especially concerned about human rights and meeting higher compliance standards.  Organizations should take an enterprise-level approach to identify AI risks, and then  manage and mitigate them in a flexible way while considering the real context of  the application. Figure 11 – AI risk categories  Performance risk  •Errors  •Bias •Opaqueness  •Performance instability  Security risk  •Adversarial attacks  •Cyber intrusion & privacy  risks •Open source software risks  Control risk  •Lack of human agency  •Detecting rogue AI and  unintended consequences  •Lack of clear accountability Enterprise risk  •Reputation  •Financial performance  •Legal and compliance  •Discrimination  •Value misalignment  Economic risk  •Job displacement  •Enhancing inequality  •“Winner takes all”  power concentration  Societal risk  •Misinformation and  manipulation  •Intelligence divide  •Surveillance and warfare Application- level  risks Business- and  national-level risks 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 18 •The specific risk an AI system may pose is directly related to its application context. For  example, ask what data is used, what types of decisions are made and by whom, and  which AI technique has been adopted.  •Organizations need an enterprise approach and risk management procedures to  identify, evaluate, mitigate and monitor the AI risks over time.  •Make the whole organization aware of AI risks, how they can occur and how to mitigate  them.  •Special attention should be given to bias and interpretability risks. Takeaways 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 19 Organizational AI  governance is coming  of age  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 19
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 20 Keeping pace with shifting regulatory landscapes, effectively mitigating risks, and  enacting policies that align with contextualized data and AI ethics for an organization  require robust governance and accountability. Practically, this means that organizations  not only need to identify tools and structures to oversee the development of AI, they also  need to define accountable parties for AI use, development and oversight. Increasingly,  organizations are turning to technical solutions to mitigate bias, improve explainability,  monitor for robustness over time and more. It is important to note that these tools are at  different levels of maturity, and their use may not fully satisfy the needs outlined by ethical  principles. A holistic approach to governance uses process, policies and standards, and  holistic governance that is tech-enabled rather than simply tech-first.  Our survey results showed AI risk identification and accountability is still in its infancy.  Only 19% of participating companies have a formal and documented process that gets  reported to all stakeholders; 29% of companies have a formal process only when there is  a specific event; and the rest have only an informal process or no clearly defined process  at all.  Currently, how do you think AI accountability is identified in your organization? Figure 12 – AI accountability by maturity level  4%<1% 14% 6%Organization Maturity Overall  comparison  We do not have any clearly-defined process for  identifying AI accountability  The developer or the person who approved the  application or model for release is ultimately  accountable  We have an informal review process that is triggered  if there is an incident We have a formal, documented review process that is  triggered if an incident occurs  We are completely transparent about the boundaries  of accountability for all stakeholders and gather or  publish documented evidence to support this  transparency 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 21Holistic governance begins with the strategy of an organization, which should include the  desired uses and expectations for data, analytics and AI. At this level, organizations need  to define their priorities. The planning stage is where organizations stand up the  programs for model development and data use, followed by the ecosystem stage, which  sources the technology and personnel required to achieve the targets established in the  strategy phase. Governance should be proportional, meaning it should be tied to the  context of the application itself12 so it doesn’t impose overly burdensome tasks on the  development teams or stifle innovation. Several factors may inform the governance  requirements, including the risk of the system itself, the privacy of the data used, the  novelty of the system and need for new governance mechanisms.  12https://www.pwc.com/jp/en/knowledge/ thought leadership /comprehensive-ai-governance-needed-now.html  Effective risk mitigation and governance require an organization-wide approach to AI and  data governance. This approach must be end to end, as well as far-reaching across all  three lines of defense, where ownership and accountability are clearly articulated.  End-to-end governance 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 22Understand the  business  challenges: identify  and source data,  including actual and  synthetic Design the solution,  select the analytic  and AI methods  suited for the  application and  requirements Data  preparation  including  data  selection,  cleansing,  extraction  and  imputation Iterative  feature  selection and  engineering  to create final  ML-ready  dataset Build and  validate the  solution with  continuous  testing Publication of a  trained model into a  test or dev  environment for  testing and  evaluation Implementation into  business process  and workflows;  evangelization Ongoing monitoring  of outcomes for  continuous  observation  and auditing Evaluation of  insights and  actions against  business objectives Individual AI systems are developed in the iterative nine-step model development and  deployment processes. In these stages, data scientists and developers must translate  business needs and priorities into well-scoped models and software processes. Data  must be obtained, transformed and manipulated as needed for the application. A model is  iteratively built, trained and tested, until an optimal solution is determined. This solution is  independently validated against user expectations and existing processes before being  formally deployed. Then it is continually monitored for efficacy.  Technical solutions from software and cloud companies target these nine steps for their  governance solutions. At each stage gate, the development and business teams  (sometimes referred to as the First Line) work with leadership and quality assurance  reviewers (the Second Line) to obtain sign off. It is not a given that a system will pass all  stage gates. In fact, to do so requires testing, documentation and alignment on  expectations. The development process is accompanied by policies, standards and  procedures that are complied with. Importantly, this life cycle does not constitute all of the  governance process for AI. That process is larger and starts with organizational  strategy.13 A third line, Internal Audit, evaluates the effectiveness of controls.  Value scoping Value discovery Value delivery Value stewardship Shall we proceed  with the AI  solution? Stage gates  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91These five stage gates are designed to engage the three lines at different points in the  development process, making the conscious decision at each point to progress the  application based on concrete requirements.  13 https://towardsdatascience.com/top-down-and-end-to-end-governance-for-the-responsible-use-of-ai-c67f360c64ba Does the  model meet  our  expectations?  2Do we deploy  the model  into  production?  3Is the model  ready to be  transitioned for  BAU  operation?  4Should the model  continue as-is, or  be retrained,  redesigned or  retired?  5Figure 13 – The development life cycle for analytics and AI  Nine-step model development life cycle  Business and data  understanding Solution design Data  extraction Preprocessing Model  building Model deployment  (Dev) Transition and  execution Ongoing  monitoring Evaluation and  check-in 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 23•Define organizational guidelines and standards for governance that business units can  leverage.  •Incorporate the three lines of defense structure into AI development and escalate  sensitive uses to cross-functional teams for review.  •Apply consistent documentation templates and criteria to  improve transparency.  •Use governance tools as enablers for decision-making. One mechanism that can be leveraged across the five stage gates — which has been  increasingly called for by the  academic community  and has been proposed in regulations  — is the Algorithmic Impact Assessment (AIA). While there are different interpretations of  what AIAs look like in practice, they are ultimately intended to accompany the  development of a system, to make critical decisions about the design and limitations of a  given system, and to act as a source of documentation for others (like consumers) who  would ultimately benefit from or be impacted by the system in deployment. Some  organizations are creating new templates for an AIA, while others are building off a Data  Protection Impact Assessment, which is already required under the EU’s General Data  Protection (GDPR) for risky processing of data.  Other areas experiencing significant growth are the governance tools released  specifically for the AI and data science community. These take a few forms:  Built-in capabilities for  monitoring within cloud or  deployment platforms  On-demand assessment  tools oriented toward  black box or white box  evaluation Documentation  automation and workflows  for development.  These capabilities will be useful for effective governance, but they do not provide  complete governance on their own. The use of these tools needs to be dictated by the  organization so there is consistency of evaluation, monitoring and controls, while making  sure they serve the same objectives. For example, different teams using different bias  assessment tools with different definitions of fairness may develop tools and systems that  these teams believe are meeting the objective of fairness, but they may actually be in  conflict with one another. Algorithmic Impact Assessment (AIA) makes an entrance  Governance tools pick up steam  Takeaways 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 24 A rapidly shifting  policy and regulatory  landscape  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 24
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 25The most important roles public policy can play are to be a source for robust, focused and  agile regulation, and to signal leading practices to organizations. Because regulations are  often slow to launch, regulators engage in public policy efforts to inform soft-law and  guidance. Once policy is tested in the market, it may inform a more robust regulatory  framework. Many companies have expressed a desire for more concrete regulatory  requirements: For example, major technology companies have backed away from facial  recognition in the US until regulation is passed. Many policymaking bodies are investing  significantly in upskilling, research, onboarding industry experts, formal industry  collaboration and advocating for sandboxed development. Public policy is increasingly playing an important role in addressing the challenges of  balancing benefits with risks, and clarifying how and where AI should be used in certain  public contexts and how it should be regulated13. Our study participants ranked lawful  and compliant application of AI as their third priority, following reliability and data privacy  — moving up from fourth place.  Some of this policy is driven by increased advocacy toward addressing identified risks,  such as discrimination and inequality. At both the national and supranational level over  the past few years, rich, robust AI public policy initiatives have emerged, engaging  stakeholders across the public and private sectors, academia, research, regulators, think  tanks, advocacy and standards, among others. At the national level, many countries have  issued National AI and data strategies to boosting innovation, research and development,  offering business and consumer protection, training and reskilling14. At the supranational  level, emerging policies for AI are designed to provide robust guidelines and  recommendations to govern technology and to align with ethical principles and human  rights. These efforts include those driven by institutions ranging from the European  Commission on Trustworthy AI, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and  Development (OECD) and consortia like the Global Partnership on AI.  13 https://digitaltechitp.nz/2021/04/07/how-do-we-ensure-the-responsible-use-of-ai-by-governments/  14https://www.pwc.lu/en/advisory/digital-tech-impact/technology/gaining-national-competitive-advantage-through-ai.html#:~:text=At%20PwC%2 C%20we%20have%20developed,being%20made%20by%20different%20countries.  
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 26By forming strong partnerships between public policy bodies and industry, some  policymakers are trying to complement existing self-governance approaches with  regulatory frameworks, considering the use cases and risks involved15. For example, the  UK and European Union are outlining approaches in which AI ethics principles will guide  the overall design, development and deployment of AI in a country, complementing a  graded risk-based approach that varies by use case and by sector.  All countries are different, so a one-size-fits-all approach to policy would not work well. As  such, AI-related regulations are in various stages of maturity across the world economies.  These regulations are often built on common themes of data privacy and protection,  accountability and innovation in AI.  Providing data protection and privacy is a leading theme in AI-related policies and  regulations that are picking up steam. While the landmark GDPR was passed by the EU  several years back, other territories have launched similar initiatives. For example, bills at  the state level across the United States focus on data privacy for AI and automated  decisioning systems. Japan is defining a legal framework around data collection and  usage as shown by its modification of the Act on Protection of Personal Information and  the introduction of the Act on Anonymously Processed Medical Information to Contribute  to Research and Development in the Medical Field.  Another emerging regulatory theme is accountability, in which a mechanism growing in  popularity is a risk-based approach to governance. The European Union’s GDPR has  acted as a template for the recently released AI Act16. This act also introduced conformity  assessments, common in the software space, for quality assessment. In the US,  proposals like the Algorithmic Accountability Act also reference assessments as a way to  provide accountability.  To pursue innovation while protecting against the risks, regulations focused on specific  use cases are emerging, as well as the sponsorship of standards to guide development.  15 https://www.weforum.org/whitepapers/ai-governance-a-holistic-approach-to-implement-ethics-into-ai 16https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1623335154975&uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0206  
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 27The recent Request for Information by the five financial services regulators in the US  highlights potential upcoming financial services-specific guidance. Besides bills, the US  has issued the Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial  Intelligence, and has devised several draft technical standards around bias,  accountability, explainability and more for AI systems with the National Institute of  Standards and Technology (NIST).  Japan’s attempt at removing hurdles in AI adoption and balancing R&D acceleration is   evidenced by the amendments of the Copyright Act, which allows  the business model for   selling learning data sets used for machine learning, and the Road Transport Vehicle Act,   which paves the way for autonomous driving. Singapore builds on this trend with the   Road Traffic Autonomous Motor Vehicles Rules (to regulate trials of autonomous motor   vehicles and push the development of automated vehicle technology) and the Protection   from Online Falsehoods and Manipulation Act (to advocate punishment for fake news  and  deep fakes).   Countries like Australia, which  do not yet have any specific laws regulating AI or   algorithmic decision-making,  are advancing a range of related use-case-specific laws and   legal concepts for autonomous vehicles and autonomous weapons systems. These   countries may also be advancing national AI strategies and agendas, like Australia’s AI   Action Plan, Digital Economy Strategy, AI Ethics Framework and AI Technology   Roadmap, and AI Standards Roadmap.  A commonality across these regulatory efforts is the push to prioritize ethics and develop  trust with the subjects of data collection who, invariably, are also potential consumers of  AI. Some countries consider fundamental human rights, social empowerment and  Sustainable Development Goals as foundational to proposed regulation, as evident in  recent proposals from India17 and Japan18. It appears these efforts intend to prevent the   throttling of innovation in the enforcement of these regulations .  17https://niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2021-02/Responsible-AI-22022021.pdf  18https://www.cas.go.jp/jp/seisaku/jinkouchinou/pdf/humancentricai.pdf
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 28The proposal outright bans any kind of AI activity that could seriously impact  individuals. These AI technologies pose unacceptable risks according to EU  standards. 1 The proposal has identified several categories of high-risk AI and has laid  separate rules for their usage: critical infrastructure, education/vocation, safety  components, employment and worker management, and biometric identification  among others. Articles 6 through 11 of the regulation establish classifications of  high-risk AI, their compliance and the specifics of their risk management system,  data and governance rules, technical documentation and record-keeping. Human  oversight is compulsory. The regulations also apply to providers of high-risk AI  apart from developers. Providers are responsible for establishing and maintaining  quality management systems, drawing up technical documentation and  maintaining compliance with all regulations. These risk categories are hotly  debated at the moment. 2 The framework does not impose heavy restrictions on AI technologies that pose  limited or minimal risks. 3 Policymakers will need to consider a number of key issues as they debate the European  Commission’s proposed law to regulate AI. Most agree on the goal of strengthening  European competitiveness in the global economy, but views diverge on how to achieve  that without putting European businesses at a disadvantage. For example, some  policymakers want to see requirements for algorithmic explainability and transparency,  plus ex-ante risk assessments, while others are more willing to embrace soft-law  solutions such as self-regulation. In reaching a consensus on how to achieve their aim of  strengthening European competitiveness in the global economy, lawmakers will need to  decide how to strike the right balance between protecting consumers and encouraging  innovation.  Regulatory activity around AI systems has only emerged in the past few years, which  means policymakers have minimal precedent to reference when they defend the bill.  While the EU may be the first to introduce a legal framework for AI systems, it’s likely that  others will follow. The European Union has proposed a first-of-its-kind regulatory framework for the ethical  use of AI (the AI Act). The EU proposal divides AI systems according to categories of risk  and imposes different restrictions for each category. Proposed EU legislation on AI16 16https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1623335154975&uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0206  
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 29•Policy and regulation can be accelerators (helping increase adoption by engendering  trust by managing for moral implications and risks), as well as inhibitors (slowing  innovation).  •Regulations built on the foundation of these policies not only ensures safe, robust and  ethical use of AI, but also provides clarity about its development. This may bolster  confidence and encourage R&D investment in AI by reducing uncertainty. Therefore,  regulators are considering legal hurdles that do not impede innovation, but instead  build trust for all involved stakeholders.  •Politics can play an important role in countries’ attempts to increase their competitive  edge and raise their eminence in the AI field both globally and locally. In some cases,  there is incentive for governments to frame human-rights-focused, data-driven policies,  since that indicates appreciation of the fundamental rights of citizens.  •Businesses are taking an increasingly important role in helping frame AI-related policies  and in collaborating with regulators. This collaboration, including with civil society, is  needed to develop regulations that are coherent and holistic and that create  competitive advantages for future generations.  •Public policy framing and implementations are a win-win situation for governments and  companies alike. Regulators utilize them as a testing ground before hard regulations  are put in place. These policies also act as guidance for the things to come for  executives who plan on building or utilizing AI in both their strategic and day-to-day  operations.  •Algorithmic decision-making is highly contextual, and new legal protections will be  needed to address the challenges that will emerge with time. Takeaways 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 30 Emerging topics in  responsible AI  PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 30
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 31As consumer expectations for trust and transparency grow, comprehensive data ethics  frameworks are needed to explicitly embed values into the entire data supply chain. This  will build on the data privacy and protection compliance processes that start maturing in  organizations as a result of data privacy legislation, like the European Union’s GDPR and  the California Consumer Protection Act (CCPA). In fact, these legislative acts provided  the first step toward adoption of ethical data practices, as data privacy was selected as  one of the more important ethical principles by our survey respondents. With the increase  in data use across organizations, especially for AI systems, the need for an ethical  approach to data management is critical. Data ethics might be the most robust approach  toward achieving ethical AI, by confirming that the right ethical principles are considered  in the context of data supply chain, and by building a robust, responsible foundation for  future AI applications and uses.  In the absence of regulatory frameworks, assessing the quality of AI systems’ output  against set standards emerges as one of the more accessible ways to govern AI  responsibly — even though few standards are defined. The field of AI assurance  is  described as “governance mechanisms for third parties to develop trust in the compliance  and risk of a system or organization.”19  Formal definitions surrounding assurance require robust, industry-agreed- upon  standards. The community is advancing other approaches, including bias audits,  certifications, accreditations and impact assessments in lieu of (or in anticipation of)  standards. An international ecosystem is required to facilitate the consistency and  interoperability of approaches across jurisdictions to enable a global perspective on AI  governance20. There is a growing role for Second Line functions (Privacy, Compliance and Data  Governance) to come together for better AI and data governance. Despite this need,  there is also recognition that there likely should be a designated owner to oversee the  rollout of AI governance and coordinate collaboration between teams. Some  organizations might choose the Privacy group to own AI governance, given the increased  requirements beyond just compliance that some are adopting with respect to data and  data use.  19https://cdei.blog.gov.uk/2021/04/15/the-need-for-effective-ai-assurance/ 20https://cdei.blog.gov.uk/2021/05/11/the-european-commissions-artificial-intelligence-act-highlights-the-need-for-an-eff ective-ai-assurance-ecosystem/
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 32 Other organizations might choose IT ownership, given the technical nature of AI systems.  Those in financial services might decide to expand the remit of Model Risk Management  to oversee governance of all AI systems, not just high-risk, regulated models. Other  entities are considering establishing an entirely new office for the role of AI governance.  Compliance-shy organizations might also choose to bestow AI governance ownership on  the First Line themselves, choosing self-regulation. This practice is not common, as the  answer to “Who owns AI?” is not always the same as “Who owns AI governance and  responsible AI?” The reality is that most organizations are still trying to figure out what  works best for them, and there is no one-size-fits-all solution given the lack of standards  currently in place. Which organizational model to adopt, which governance mechanisms  and tools to use, how to connect ethical principles to practices, which external bodies to  engage, and how to report are all in flux. Further, most organizations do not have  centralized development teams and, consequently, do not know precisely where AI is in  use across the enterprise. What is clear is that leveraging existing governance structures  wherever possible can help increase adoption and decrease the inertia that sometimes  accompanies processes that are viewed as burdensome and overly bureaucratic. 
PwC  | Responsible AI – Maturing from theory to practice 33To learn more, visit our Responsible AI website.  www.pwc.com/rai Contacts  Anand Rao  Global Artificial Intelligence Leader,  PwC US  Annie Veillet  Partner, One Analytics, PwC Canada  Matt Kuperholz  Partner, Chief Data Scientist, PwC Australia  Matt Labovich  Data, Analytics and Technology Leader,  PwC US  Euan Cameron  AI Leader, PwC United Kingdom  Sudipta Ghosh  Data & Analytics Leader, PwC India 
© 2021 PwC. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the US member firm or one of its subsidiaries or affiliates, and may  sometimes refer to the PwC network. Each member firm is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure  for further details. 
