 Connect with us :   PrivacyNZ   StatisticsNZ  @NZPrivacy   @stats_nz  privacy.org.nz   stats.govt.nz   policy@privacy.org.nz   datalead@stats.govt.nz  Background   Guidance, oversight, and transparency  are essential to fostering trust,  confidence, and integrity around the use of data the government holds on behalf   of New Zealanders. It’s important for Kiwis to understand how their personal  data is used.   These princi ples support safe and  effective data and analytics. They will  underpin the development of guidance  to support government agencies on best  practice for the use of data and analytics  for decision- making.   The principles were jointly developed by  the Chief Gov ernment Data Steward and  the Privacy Commissioner.  Deliver clear public benefit  The use of data and analytics must have clear benefits  for New Zealanders. Data and data analytics are tools that support decision- making and it’s essential that in  collecting and using public data, government agencies consider, and can demonstrate, positi ve public  benefits.    This includes :  • considering the views of all relevantstakeholders   • ensuring all associated policies and decisionshave been evaluated for fairness and potentialbias and have a solid grounding in law   • embedding  a te ao Māori perspective  through a Treaty -based partnership approach.   Ensure data is fit for purpose  Using the right data in the right context can substantially  improve decision -making  and analytical models, and  will avoid generating potentially harmful outcomes.    Decision -makers need to be  aware of how data is  collected and analysed, including the accuracy,  precision, consistency , and completeness of data  quality, and take special care when re -using data that  was originally collected for another purpose .   They should also be conscious of analytical models  constructed  to interpret data, and any automated  decision-m aking occurring as part of this process.   Ensuring data and analytical models are fit for purpose  will  help avoid risks like bias or discr imination. Focus on people  Keep in mind the people behind the dat a and how to  protect them against misuse of information. I t‘s  essential to consider the privacy  and ethical   implications of any analytical process that draws on data collected about people , as using  data and analytics for  decision -making can have real -life impacts .    Consider the  methods used to  protect personal  identifying information and preserve the security of any  output. Combining multiple anonymous datasets can re-identify individual people.   Personal information should only be kept for as long as nec essary.   Maintain t ransparency  Transparency supports co llaboration, partnership , and  shared responsibility , and is essential for accountability.   This includes ensuring New Zealanders know what data  is held about them; how it’ s kept secure ; who has  access to it ; and how it’s used.   Consultation with stakeholders  and M āori as partners  ensure s manaakitanga (data users show mutual  respect) , and kaitiakitanga (New Zealanders are   mindful of their responsibilities and the communities they source data from),  by making sure  all data uses    are managed in a highly trusted, inclusive , and  protected way.   Data use an d analytical processes should be well  documented and in line with all relevant legislation,  and state sector guidelines. Explanations of decisions  –  and the analytica l activities behind them – should  be in  clear, simple, easy-t o-understand language.  Understand  the limitations  While data is a powerful tool, all analytical processes  have inherent limitations in their ability to predict and describe outcomes . These limitations are sometimes  not evenly distributed, meaning they can perpetuate or intensify poor outc omes for particular groups . An  awareness of these  limitations is essential when  analysing data. D ecision -makers must be  fully informed.   Developing data capability helps to create depth of understanding and implement the most useful data tools while keeping  any limitations in mind.   Regular assessments to check for bias  and other  harmful elements , and address any over-reliance on  correlations , are essential in the development and  operation of analytical processes.  Feeding assessment  outcomes back into the de sign of systems and  processes can help ensure unfair or discriminatory outcomes aren’t generated.   Retain human oversight  Analytical processes are a tool to inform human decision -making  and should never entirely replace  human oversight.   Ensure significant decisions based on data involve  human judgement  and evaluation , and that automated  decision -making processes are regularly reviewed to  make sure they ’re still fit  for purpose.    Decision -makers should approach analytical tools with  an appropriate awareness of limitations of data quality and other sources of error.    To ensure accountability, decisions  based on analytical  methods  or automated processes  affecting  people  should be openly disclosed, and appropriate review  and feedback  mechanisms developed to preserve  fundamental rights and freedoms.  P rinciples for the safe and effective use of data and analytics May  2018  
