The Future of   Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group (BCG) is a global  management consulting firm and the world’s  leading advisor on business strategy. We partner  with clients from the private, public, and not-forprofit sectors in all regions to identify their  highest-value opportunities, address their most  critical challenges, and transform their enterprises.  Our customized approach combines deep insight  into the dynamics of companies and markets with  close collaboration at all levels of the client  organization. This ensures that our clients achieve  a sustainable competitive advantage, build more  capable organizations, and secure lasting results.  Founded in 1963, BCG is a private company with  offices in more than 90 cities in 50 countries. For  more information, please visit bcg.com. Bucerius Law School is the first private law school  in Germany. Established in 2000 by the ZEITStiftung Ebelin und Gerd Bucerius, Bucerius seeks  to offer the highest quality in internationally  focused and practical-oriented legal education.  Combining rigorous legal instruction with a  mandatory term abroad, business administration  classes, foreign language studies, a technology  curriculum including computer science, and data  science as well as coding, professional internships,  and a broad nonlegal academic program, a  Bucerius education offers students a complete and  well-rounded package. Its international orientation  sets Bucerius apart from other law schools in  Germany and is central to its mission to advance  international legal education by focusing on the  diverse legal systems shaping international law  and business today. Since its inception, Bucerius  has been recognized as a model for highereducation reform throughout Germany. The Legal Tech Association Germany is committed  to an innovation-friendly legal framework. Together  with our members, we are shaping the  transformation of the legal market. We believe  that innovation arises when different perspectives  and disciplines interact. We are the platform for  exchange between a wide variety of players in the  German legal market—regardless of whether they  are law firms, legal departments, legal protection  insurers, software companies, legal-tech startups,  the judiciary, or others.
June 2022Dirk Hartung, Florian Brunnader, Christian Veith, Philipp Plog, and Tim WoltersThe Future of   Digital Justice 
2 The Future of Digital JusticeAT A GLANCE Justice systems worldwide are under increasing pressure as legal complexity rises and  more people rightfully demand access to justice. Digital transformation is the key for  courts to keep pace. Digital justice is an immense chance to improve the lives of   millions of people, but only if the technology is understood and implemented fast.  Drivers of Digital Justice Globally, the digitalization of justice systems is just beginning and generally lagging  behind the digital transformation of the rest of society. This has led to a widening gap  between the expected user experience for both consumers and businesses and the   actual services provided by the courts. Status quo of Digital Justice Transformation The current state of digital justice can be understood using an adapted version of the  three-layer framework previously developed for private legal technology: It differentiates between enabler, process support, and substantial law solutions. Compared to   other parts of the legal system, courts and public offices are several years behind in  technology adoption. Despite recent incentives to innovate during the COVID-19 pandemic, even economically strong countries such as Germany risk missing the boat when  it comes to future readiness. Insufficient hardware and software infrastructure, budget  issues, a hindering mindset, and fear of personal disadvantages among stakeholders  are all to blame. International Best Practices Austria, Canada, Singapore, and the United Kingdom are leading in justice digitalization.  They demonstrate several key traits that help make for the successful digital transfor mation of a justice system. Adoption of software development best practices from the  private sector, early, strong, and decisive leadership, user-centricity, and openness to  process optimization and data-based strategies have helped them manage the relevant  changes. Future of Digital Justice Digital justice enables faster, more efficient case management and the effective resolution of legal conflicts, better working conditions within courts, and greater access to the  legal system. Countries that strive for these positive results require a bold vision at the  outset, a purposefully designed governance, and an adapted legal framework to ring in  the required paradigm shift. For help, they can tap into a young generation of judges,  clerks, and other civil servants eager to bet on technology to advance their country and  their careers. 2 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 3Drivers of Digital Justice The administration of justice is a core function of modern societies. Yet it  is also an enormous, resource-intensive task operating in a complex, multilay ered system shaped by societal conflicts, fundamental rights, and organizational  challenges. Globally, justice systems exist at very different levels of maturity:   According to the World Justice Project, nearly a quarter billion people live in   conditions of extreme injustice such as slavery, lacking all fundamental rights.  Another 1.5 billion people cannot obtain justice to resolve everyday legal issues,  and an astonishing 4.5 billion people lack the legal tools to protect their assets or  are incapable of accessing the public services to which they have a right. While  some of these challenges are linked to poverty and lack of institutions, insufficient access to justice persists in some of the richest, most developed countries.  Remedies are often available in theory, but the complexity, costs, and duration of  legal proceedings discourage their pursuit in practice. Many factors often simultaneously influence the availability and administration  of justice, but one is at the center: legal complexity. It results from an increasingly  globalized economy in which products and services blend physical, augmented,  and virtual realities. The rules required to organize this multidimensional global  marketplace form a constantly growing, ever more complex, and interlinked   regulatory ecosystem. Courts—as the primary institutions to interpret these rules  and resolve resulting conflicts—not only have to navigate more and more complicated laws but also deal with an explosion of case numbers in certain areas. Often  understaffed and ill-equipped with complexity management tools from the past  (e.g., paper records or fax machines), they take longer to decide cases, require  costly outside expertise, or reach results that are unexpected by the parties  involved.  High costs, the lengthy time required to resolve cases, and uncertainty regarding  outcomes affect individuals and companies alike. As a result, individuals often  display rational ignorance—failing to understand that a particular problem has a  legal solution—or rational indifference—not pursuing valid legal claims because  it seems like too much hassle. Consumer-facing legal technology companies have  helped millions of people worldwide overcome these hurdles, understand their  rights, and pursue their claims in courts. Companies are more likely to turn to  professional providers of legal services, which increasingly use technology to handle legal complexity (see our report “How Legal Technology Will Change the Business  of Law”). Their advice is refined by in-house legal departments benefiting from  improved processes, multidisciplinary approaches, and, again, widely adopted  legal technology and operations tools (see our report   “Legal Operations: Getting More from In-House Legal Departments and Their Outside  Counsel”). 
4 The Future of Digital JusticeYet when legal proceedings leave the sphere of the consumer or the company and  enter the courts, they are often thrown back in time: While collaboration software and chatbots enable near real-time communication and decisions, inquiries  from judges and minor procedural orders can take months to resolve. Processes  that could be instantly tracked on department-wide dashboards turn into opaque  proceedings with irregular updates provided only upon request. Documents that  could take minutes to create at negligible cost lead to perennial lawsuits that cost  tens and hundred of thousands to decide. Why is the experience so different between legal services in the private sector  and public dispute resolution in courts? In this report, we argue that this is primarily due to the lack of digitalization in our justice systems. Courts try to manage 21st-century complexity with 19th-century tools such as paper file keeping.  As a result, insufficient digitalization leads to a bad user experience and eroding  trust in our legal institutions. It drives parties into private dispute resolution and  is increasingly seen as a negative location factor, inhibiting business activity and  economic growth. It risks overwhelming judges and clerks. Justice systems,  intended to satisfy both those seeking and administering justice, instead leave  each group dissatisfied. Therefore, this report is, first and foremost, a strong call  to action regarding digital justice reform.  Our research, however, also reveals grounds for optimism, including some countries that are celebrating great improvements with digital justice systems. Examining digitalization efforts in Austria, Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom, and  Singapore, we found drastic differences and impressive success stories. Digital  approaches seem to benefit countries from different legal traditions, sizes, and  geographies. While not every aspect is universally transferable, the strategies  employed by today’s leading nations can provide strategic guidance and specific  blueprints to strengthen justice systems in less advanced nations. The study, conducted by the Boston  Consulting Group, Bucerius Law School,  and the German Legal Tech Association,  comprised nearly 50 in-depth interviews  with judges, clerks, and court IT manag ers, government officials, general counsels, partners and managers from large  law firms, insurance company owners  and managers, board members of trade  associations, and academics researching the legal system, court organization,  and their legal and economic effects.During the interviews, we gained insights on questions such as how courts  successfully launch digital prototypes  and procedures, which tools both judges  and parties find most helpful, what is  most challenging about establishing  digital justice, how those challenges can  best be overcome, and how these measures are intertwined with legislative  actions and law reform. The interviews were complemented by  extensive desk research, analysis, and  evaluation of the existing literature.ABOUT THE STUDY 4 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 5A successful digital transformation of the justice system does not merely require the  right set of technologies; it needs extensive change management and coordinated  legislative reform. Ideally, a clear strategic vision leads to governance structures tailored to the specifics of a legal system, such as federalism or self-government of the  judiciary. Where necessary, procedural law and court organization have to be adapted  to meet the expectations of parties, judges, and political stakeholders. An enormous task in and of itself and not without demanding challenges and risks,  digitalization currently presents our greatest chance to meaningfully and sustainably  improve access to justice. Status Quo of Digital Justice Given the vastness of the term justice and the great diversity of justice systems worldwide, it is important to specify what we call digital justice for the purposes of this  report. Justice is closely related to courts, which are its most important institutions.  Courts were originally named after the location where justice was administered, but  today that meaning is shifting. Digital justice can be understood as a process rather  than a location or institution. Digital courts can be technology-based extensions of  traditional, physical courts. As such, they are part of a well-understood public environment, determined by court organization rules, hierarchy, and formalized relationships and modes of interaction. These raise questions concerning the digitalization  of existing processes, tools to support both judges and parties involved in cases, and  interfaces to other forms of digital public services, such as a national digital identity.  Digital jstice, however, can also take the form of fully online dispute-resolution mechanisms. These can be public, such as the European Online Dispute Resolution platform, but can also be operated by private players, such as e-commerce platforms or  online payment system providers. They offer functions of conflict settlement from  dispute avoidance and containment to dispute resolution in an increasingly decentralized form. This independence from the nation state as the traditional provider of  dispute resolution leads to questions about their democratic legitimacy and concerns about a healthy evolution of the law as cases dry up. In fully digital proceedings, new solutions have to be found concerning cybersecurity, evidence, and the  effects of both asynchronous communications and telecommunications. Against the backdrop of an increasingly digital society, some aspects of justice   systems seem archaic. As the judiciary is a traditionally monopolistic provider of   justice, few of the larger trends of digitalization have taken place within it. While the  business world went from emails and text on static websites to instant messaging  and video on mobile devices and is on the cusp of virtual reality, many courts still  require printed documents, wet signatures, and in-person appearances. As processes  at traditional courts and experiences in everyday life diverge more and more, societal friction between the justice system and its users increases. This results in fewer  individuals and companies enforcing their rights in court, as evidenced by the dramatic reduction of case numbers in some parts of the justice system in countries like   Germany (-40% from 1995 to 2020 in civil proceedings). When, in other areas, case  counts rise due to technology-enabled ease and economic incentives (e.g., passenger 
6 The Future of Digital Justicerights or car-emissions scandal claims), they risk overburdening the courts and  causing longer durations for proceedings (+40% from 1995 to 2020 in first-instance civil proceedings in Germany). These developments in turn further deter those seeking justice from using the  legal system. This phenomenon is most visible in the business-to-consumer space  and has led to a (partial) liberalization of the market for legal services in many  countries, such as the Legal Services Act in the United Kingdom or its equivalent  in Germany. Our interview partners, however, revealed a similar problem in the  business-to-business market. They cited the duration of proceedings along with  intransparency on case status and painstaking communications as major hurdles  to pursuing their claims in court. These are complemented by very low foreseeability for both the costs and the end results of legal proceedings. More than once,  companies and their legal counsel spoke of a system optimized for its providers— judges and clerks—rather than for its users. So is it at least working well for those on the bench? Unfortunately, our analysis  finds them equally dissatisfied. While they share a desire for less formal, more  efficient communications and reliable infrastructure, they are more interested in  administrative and operational aspects. These include easy and permanent  EXHIBIT 1 | Case Numbers and Duration of Proceedings in Germany First Instance Civil Cases, Germany BaselineRelative Change+20%+40% -20% -40% Source: Geschäftsentwicklung der Zivilsachen, Bundesamt für Justiz, buceri.us/verfdauerlgDuration Judgments1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 6 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 7access to court records and automatization of recurring administrative tasks such as  scheduling trials or monitoring deadlines. Judges also say it is very important that  they be respected both personally and as members of the institution. A repeated  concern is that this respect, which is in part displayed in some of the more archaic  procedural rituals, could be eroded by an augmented use of technology. Updated Three-Layer Framework  The original division of legal technology tools into three layers was a cornerstone of  our first study on the topic (“How Legal Technology Will Change the Business of Law”). It  has proven both flexible and popular in recent years and can be equally used in the  justice technology space. As the market for legal technology becomes more mature  over time, the lines between the layers start to blur. However, the core distinction  between enabler technologies, support process solutions, and substantive law solutions can still be made. These categories can be ordered by their specificity, from  general-purpose to those specifically built for legal and justice use cases. They are  also interconnected, as higher-level solutions often require capabilities from   lower-level solutions. Source: BCG analysisLitigatio n Collecti on of case  facts  and re search  of lawApplicati on of  law in  ﬁnal decisionEnforcement ADR Case manage ment Docume nt and knowle dge manag ement Platfo rm infrastructure SecurityProcesses and tasks Layer Substantive  Law  Solutions Support  Process  Solutions Enabler 123 Cloud Conne ctivity  Techno logy solutions used in the fut ure can be organized in t hree l ayers  in our existing legal t echnology  framew orkEXHIBIT 2 | Updated Three-Layer Framework Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 7
8 The Future of Digital JusticeThe first category is at the more general end of the spectrum. Enabler technolo gies are focused on facilitating digitalization. Some of these offerings, such as  cloud storage tools and cybersecurity solutions, have been developed by general  tech vendors and are relevant for a variety of other public players. Therefore,  potential synergies are greatest at this level, since solutions such as a national dig ital identity can be used not only in courts but in contact with a variety of public  institutions. Our research reveals dangerous gaps in connectivity and cybersecurity if justice institutions treat enabler technologies as an afterthought. These  types of solutions require extensive resources and are not particularly prestigious.  When they are neglected, however, consequences can be dire—from long-term  shutdowns to loss of data through breaches or loss of productivity. Especially  since many higher-level solutions need a functioning infrastructure, inattentiveness to enabler technologies risks inhibiting more capable, more prestigious   projects. Tools in the justice system are most numerous and advanced at the intermediate  level: support process solutions. Within many justice systems, some form of  electronic case management system has been implemented. Quite often, however,  courts or even individual judges run paper-based systems in parallel, and solutions vary greatly from judge to judge, court to court, and jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Many of our interview partners reported a great variety of these tools being  used in their day-to-day activities. Where these tools exchange data seamlessly,  they tend to fulfill the expectations of their users. More often than not, though,  solutions are built for a single purpose and data portability and open interfaces  are not a priority. This leads to lower adoption rates as judges and clerks even  revert back to existing paper-based solutions. The third category is substantive law solutions, which support or in part take  over core legal tasks traditionally handled by judges, clerks, or parties. At the bor der of support process solutions, tools can be used to create standard documents  required to advance the proceedings while also bearing legal meaning, such as a  notice of summons. More advanced tools, some of which are currently tested in  several jurisdictions, can help analyze facts and reorganize submissions by the  parties, which is particularly helpful in extensive litigation. At the most advanced  level, technology tools draft entire opinions in high-volume, little-variation case  scenarios, in which the law is sufficiently clear. These tools can learn from past  decisions and save a lot of time, but they currently require a judge to sign off on  them. Substantive law solutions, however, do not always require cutting-edge  machine learning technology. In many cases, properly designed information  about the law and self-education processes can help parties reach a settlement.  While information aggregation such as recidivism risk assessment and fully  autonomous robot judges get a lot of attention in the press and academic publications, our research finds that they do not play a relevant role in practice. Instead,  technology solutions at this level are typically part of human-designed and  human-driven processes and augment rather than replace judges and clerks.  Although these solutions exist in a number of jurisdictions and for the most part  are successfully deployed, their adoption is still below the rates for enabler technologies and support process solutions.
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 9Germany: A Case Study Germany is the largest economy in Europe and consistently ranked among the  leading countries in the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index. The country’s  civil justice system performs even better, currently bringing it to third place. Its  lowest results concern accessibility and affordability of civil justice and freedom  from unreasonable delay, which fall behind other categories such as freedom of  improper government influence, corruption, or effective enforcement. Germany  is an ideal candidate for a case study as it has both sufficient room for improvement and the necessary economic power to invest in long-term developments.  With many of the traditional, straightforward solutions for access to justice, such  as legal aid, already implemented and legal expense insurance widely popular,  Germany has to look for new approaches to further improve its access to justice.  So where does the German justice system currently stand? Our research reveals  an inconvenient truth: Technology solutions used in Germany are not only comparably small, outdated, and insufficiently user-centric, but also scattered and  inconsistent across individual states, courts, and subject matter jurisdictions (for  example, nearly 50 different solutions for digital files called “eAkte”). The digitalization of the justice system is lagging 10–15 years behind leading countries,  while case overloads, cost pressure, and an impending wave of retirement (over  25 percent of all judges will retire by 2030) increase the pressure to modernize  and digitalize the courts. Key challenges emphasized by our interviewees are  insufficient hardware and software, as well as budget concerns and an overall  perceived incapacity of public institutions to execute technology development  projects (such as the infamous email service for lawyers, “beA”). The main   reasons are seen as a lack of technologically capable personnel and a fear of per sonal disadvantages for key decision-makers. The latter is part of a pattern our  interview partners reported: Many members of the judiciary are very skeptical, if  not outright technophobic. This is primarily rooted in a general hostility toward  technology in general and more specifically data collection and handling. It stems  from an outdated understanding of data protection, rooted in negative experiences with unjust regimes abusing citizens’ data in the past. It is also caused by  negative experiences with badly managed public technology projects that over promised and under-delivered. All of this contributes to an overall lack of ambition for digital leadership in the legal profession.
10 The Future of Digital JusticeThese challenges concern all layers of legal technology tools. In parts of Germany,  internet connectivity remains problematic. Cybersecurity in one court was so  problematic that consultants publicly urged the administration to rebuild the  entire IT infrastructure from scratch, and a nine-year project to implement digital  file storage adopted as a law in 2017 is already severely behind schedule. At the  support process level, many German courts currently use a case management   system that was developed over 20 years ago and implemented over 15 years. Its  successor has been planned for more than half a decade, and the project is cur rently developing approaches and infrastructure, not for a future tool but for the  development of a future tool. The current system is not available online. At the  substantive law solution level, Germany has developed a graphic programming  prototype for passenger rights claims and tenancy law claims, while several   companies already offer much more sophisticated, fully developed tools for consumers and generally receive very high satisfaction rates. The situation is serious and requires decisive and swift action, but it is far from  hopeless. Under a recently formed government and initiatives from the Ministry  of Justice, digitalization seems to be a new priority. The COVID-19 pandemic  demonstrated the usefulness of legal technology and directly and meaningfully  impacted their adoption, e.g., for digital hearings and videoconference technology  in courtrooms. The expected shift in the judiciary could bring in a new generation  of judges and clerks that will be more open to digital solutions, less suspicious of  data collection and analysis, and more interdisciplinarily and quantitatively educated. Additionally, a great variety of digitalization initiatives and prototypes can  be found thanks to numerous working groups within the judiciary and administration and also among law and computer science students, which demonstrates  increasing awareness and interest in digital topics. Finally, Germany has a thriving  legal technology private sector due to forward-looking courts allowing for the   liberalization of the market for legal services and bold reforms of the legal framework. In summary, digitalization presents an enormous chance for a meaningful  and impactful justice reform in Germany. International Best Practices In addition to our case study of Germany laid out above, we have selected four  focus countries for this report based on their reputations for digital justice: Austria,  Canada, the United Kingdom, and Singapore. These countries represent a   variety of legal traditions, population sizes, surface areas, forms of government,  and geographic locations. Among them, we find a total of ten specific technology  solutions relevant for digital and online courts: At the enabler level, we examine  mobile infocommunications technology in courtrooms, mobile and digital signatures for court services, comprehensive cloud storage platforms, and video hear ings and conferences. At the support process level, we spotlight court analytics,  online filing, case-tracking platforms, and digital case management systems.  Finally, at the substantive law solution level, we take a closer look at (fully) online  dispute resolution, interactive legal solution explorers for self-assessment by the  parties, and tools to organize and analyze the process materials and automatically  draft court decision.
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 11 Singapore: A Global Leader Uniquely Positioned for   Justice Digitalization  Singapore is an island city-state with a population of nearly 5.5 million people  and a surface area of roughly 730 square kilometers at the southern tip of the  Malay Peninsula. Though independent since 1959 and established in its current  form as the Republic of Singapore in 1963, it follows the Common Law legal tradition. Singapore handles around 380,000 court cases per year in a three-tier  court system with the Supreme Court, the State Courts, and the Family Justice  Courts. In total, the Singaporean justice system consists of 12 civil courts, eight  criminal courts, and three appellate courts. Singapore has a longstanding strong reputation for digitalization in the public  sector. Since the early 1980s, the digitalization of the judicial branch has been a  key component of broader government strategies initiated by several prime   ministers, driven by their ministers of justice and presidents of the Supreme  Court, and executed by the Attorney-General’s Chambers, the Singapore judiciary,  and the Singapore Academy of Law. Singapore has complemented these strategic and organizational initiatives with  specific legislation to modernize civil and criminal procedural law and expressly  address electronic evidence, records, and formal requirements for signatures and  other communications. At times—for example, during the COVID-19 pandemic— swift legislative action was taken to further lower adoption thresholds and eliminate uncertainties regarding the use of remote communication technology. As a result, Singapore has the most comprehensively digitalized justice system in  the world and has established itself as a clear global leader. While its size, manageable surface area, and prosperity encourage digital justice, we find a set of  strategic decisions to be at the center of this success. First and foremost,   Singapore started its digitalization efforts early and with visible support from its  most senior leadership. A top-down push for adoption was crucial at the beginning, combined with innovation diffusion measures by legal organizations to   create buy-in from members of the judiciary, lawyers, and litigants.
12 The Future of Digital JusticeOver time, Singapore has developed an end-to-end online case management system for all jurisdictions and all stakeholders including parties, their counsels, gov ernment authorities, and courts. It allows for initiation and monitoring of pro ceedings and provides data for court analytics, including key performance  indicators as well as caseload analysis and prediction. The system builds on existing public technology, such as identity and payment systems, and makes use of  legal-specific infrastructure, such as video hearing equipment and other mobile  infocomm technology in courtrooms. Lawyers can access their case files, schedule  dates for hearings, and even participate in virtual hearings using a mobile application, which is built on top of the case management infrastructure. While the full extent of digital justice tools in Singapore would go beyond the  scope of this report and can be found in the materials suggested for further reading, its most outstanding characteristic is its full integration. All different solutions, from legal information offerings through digital self-information and  self-service legal expert systems, case management, and filing systems to video  hearing and cybersecurity infrastructure, work together and build upon each  other. They provide a clear, tangible benefit for their users and are continuously  improved and developed. This creates trust for the legal community and makes  Singapore attractive for businesses. The current infrastructure enables and facilitates the development of the justice technology of tomorrow as well. Canada: The Most Modern Tribunal in the World Canada is a North American federal parliamentary constitutional monarchy with  a population of nearly 37 million people. With a surface area of nearly 10 million  square kilometers, it is the second largest country in the world. Most of its ten  provinces and three territories follow the Common Law tradition, with Québec  typically classified as a mixed legal system. Canada operates a multilayer court  system comprising the Supreme Court of Canada, courts of the provinces and ter ritories, federal and military courts, and administrative tribunals. Canadian  courts handle well over 1 million cases per year. While Singapore was included in our focus countries due to its sheer breadth of  digital justice projects, Canada is featured for one narrow yet impressive digital  judicial endeavor. The Civil Resolution Tribunal (CRT) in British Columbia (BC)  
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 13might well be the most advanced online dispute resolution solution in the world.  Established in 2012 by the provincial parliament through the dedicated Civil   Resolution Tribunal Act, it is Canada’s first online tribunal.  Its jurisdiction was gradually expanded from strata (condominium) disputes to  most small claims (up to CAD 5,000) and motor vehicle claims. During the entire  proceedings, all interactions with the tribunal and its systems are fully digital.  The expected user journey starts with a self-service expert dialogue system called  the Solution Explorer. In subsequent negotiations and in mediation, parties are  encouraged to settle the matter amicably. Case managers guide parties through  the process. Only in the final step, after reviewing evidence, do tribunal members,  who are independent legal experts, make a formal, written decision. Parties at  the CRT are not represented by lawyers, but all legal services providers can of  course assist parties in preparing their claims. Decisions by the CRT, which are  enforceable just like court decisions, can be appealed in the Provincial Court or  the Supreme Court depending on the subject matter. However, appeal rates are  very low. The CRT has closed a total of nearly 20,000 disputes with a very high  user satisfaction rate: Nearly 85 percent (including losing parties) would recommend the CRT to others. Unlike many courts and tribunals in various jurisdictions, the CRT had the great  advantage of being designed from scratch in the 21st century. As a result, recent  findings on user friendliness, simplicity of language, and user-centric design  could be incorporated from the start without any legacy. For example, the CRT  enables low-threshold communications via mobile phone, web, and traditional  mail but emphasizes a digital-first approach and constantly improves its services  based on extensively collected public and user feedback. Such feedback and other,  more comprehensive statistics are made transparent on the tribunal’s website on  a regular basis. The website itself is regularly updated and redesigned. The technology employed operates on all three layers of our legal technology framework.  The resulting system has enabled the CRT to continue procedures during the  COVID-19 pandemic without interruption. Naturally, not everyone is as enthusiastic about this new form of digital dispute  resolution as its users. The Trial Lawyers Association of British Columbia and  others challenged the constitutionality of the CRT’s exclusive jurisdiction to classify injuries from motor vehicle accidents as “minor. ” They were partially successful in the first instance in front of the BC Supreme Court, but the BC Court of  Appeal later overturned the judgment in a split decision. The matter might ultimately be decided by the Supreme Court of Canada, but at present, the CRT is  regarded as constitutional.  Digital innovation in the justice system in Canada is naturally not limited to the  Civil Resolution Tribunal, as several Canadian jurisdictions operate video hear ing, online filing, and case management systems including digital court records  and mandatory electronic communications. The CRT, though, is a positive  reminder that continuous improvement, agile methods, and user-centric design  combined with technological capability and persistence can have a powerful  impact in the public space.
14 The Future of Digital JusticeAustria: A New Generation of Digital Trailblazers Austria is a federal parliamentary republic in the heart of Europe with a population of around 9 million and a total area of nearly 84,000 square kilometers. The  justice system is separated into ordinary (civil and criminal) and public (administrative and constitutional) courts. With up to three stages for each legal dispute,  there are more than 150 courts in total, all operated by the federal state (except  for some administrative courts at the individual state level). Austria is a classic  example of a Civil Law country, and as a member of the European Union, it is  subject to European laws and regulations. Austria has recently launched an online case management portal offering a comprehensive set of services. At the support process solutions level, users can access  digital dunning and court proceedings including case files and messages from the  courts, fill in forms for civil and criminal procedures, and make inquiries to company, land, and trademark registers. The portal also offers self-service legal infor mation and a chatbot for more complicated inquiries, reaching into substantive  law solution territory. On this level, a specialized agency for passenger rights  operates an expert system to generate passenger claims, later adjudicated by the  agency, with potentially legally binding outcomes. Additionally, on the enabler  solution level, Austria operates infrastructure for video and remote hearings and  a platform for justice-specific e-learning offerings; it also provides access to vast  numbers of court decisions online and free of charge via the legal information  system.  The Austrian mobile signature solution provides an interesting example for the  interconnection between enabler and higher-level solutions. While not specifically developed for the justice system but rather all forms of digital government,  the application is at the core of the new justice portal. Nearly one in three   Austrian residents is an active user, with several hundred new users on any given  day. Daily log-ins and document signatures vary between 100,000 and 200,000.  Wherever legal proceedings require a proof of identity or a signature, the application can be used. This has freed developers of the justice portal from developing  their own login and user management infrastructure. It requires, however, some  alignment between the justice portal and the existing solution. The successful  rollout and high customer satisfaction demonstrate that the time invested to   create this user-centric, seamless experience was well worth it.  
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 15In its development of modern justice technology, Austria has benefited from a  long tradition of relative openness toward digital solutions and successful use of  digital infrastructure in the public domain. Electronic communications with the  courts, for example, have been possible for over 30 years and mandatory since  2000. Our interview partners highlighted a strong focus on user experience, extensive focus-group testing, as well as comprehensive and adequate training as  important success factors. In addition, an overall young judiciary in Austria seems  open to further developing the existing solutions and investing to build new ones.  The Federal Ministry of Justice is seen as a reliable partner and accelerator for  digitalization projects, and the relationship between the ministry, the courts, and  stakeholder groups is often described as very productive. Austria’s success in justice digitalization accordingly also demonstrates the benefit of a future-oriented  mindset for all stakeholders. United Kingdom: The Most Ambitious Digital Justice  Reform The United Kingdom is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy  in northwestern Europe and the sixth largest economic power in the world. With  a population of more than 67 million people and a total area of nearly 250,000  square kilometers, it is the birthplace of the Common Law legal tradition and a  major provider of legal services and dispute resolution to the global economy.  The public justice system consists of up to five levels of courts including the  Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Court, Crown Court and County  Courts, and Magistrate’s Court(s) and Tribunals. Since 2016, the United Kingdom has been undertaking the Her Majesty’s Courts  and Tribunals Service (HMCTS) Reform Programme, investing more than   1 billion pounds (EUR 1.2 billion) into 50+ projects to improve efficiency and pro vide a vast variety of new, user-friendly digital services. The reform is directed at  improving access to justice and operational excellence in the entire court system,  stretching from consumers and victims of crimes to families and commercial   businesses. The reform is intended to transform the United Kingdom’s justice   system into a user-centric, future-ready version of itself. The COVID-19 pandemic 
16 The Future of Digital Justicerefocused some of the efforts in 2020, with remote hearings, paperless systems,  and digital services becoming an even more important component of a functioning justice system. HMCTS, an executive agency of the Ministry of Justice, is the single driving force  behind this ambitious project. It is primarily responsible for the administration of  the courts and tribunal of England and Wales. It operates from more than   600 locations all over the United Kingdom and employs around 17,000 staff. In  order to successfully manage the transition, HMCTS engaged additional experts  from academia and the private sector.  The reform’s progress is regularly reported on HMCTS websites, at dedicated  workshops and conferences engaging stakeholders from both academia and civil  society, and in parliamentary reports and reviews. This has led to lively public  discussion, including both praise and criticism, that has kept the topic in the pub lic’s mind and on the political agenda. In addition, the reform is independently  evaluated on a regular basis to ensure it actually improves access to justice (see  our further reading suggestions for more operational details). A great variety of  stakeholder groups and organizations have rolled out their own innovation   projects to complement the reform process. The active involvement of different stakeholders was quite visible in our inter views, and although not everyone agrees with all measures taken, interviewees  expressed that they felt they were being heard. This is crucial to the reform’s success since it includes unpopular measures such as the closure of physical courts  and unforeseen challenges such as lower digital literacy in certain groups. At present, no empirical evidence has been presented that the reform negatively impacts  the legal services market, though some legal profession organizations have  offered narratives of practices closing down. This lack of data on court operations and consequences for the economy, which  is not uncommon even in modern nation states, is at the core of a particular court  analytics project on the support process level. Started at the outset of the reform  and currently still under continuous development, it uses tools to collect court  performance data (e.g., case numbers and duration) via a unified digital case  management system. The system was originally met with criticism over fears of  surveillance of and pressure on individual judges, as well as a belief that the  information collected would be insufficient, since only basic data was planned to  be collected. Over time, though, the system, which requires no additional input  and does not meaningfully increase the court’s workload, has led to a deeper  understanding of stakeholder needs, enabled a more efficient organization of  administrative matters, and shortened average case durations. It functions as an  important pillar of future reform, providing reliable and accurate data as a basis  for management decisions. The current reform is grounded in a general understanding of English law and  the United Kingdom’s justice system as location factors and export goods and a  geopolitical tool. Firmly rooted in its past as an early global commercial power, 
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 17the United Kingdom views a modern and functioning justice system not only as a  societal achievement but as an instrument to attract businesses, increase legal  services, and spur the economy in general.  Lessons Learned Our international survey provides a number of learnings from a group of best-inclass nations in digital justice. First and foremost, the digitalization of justice systems is a monumental but ultimately very rewarding task. It has potential for some quick wins but requires  stamina and extraordinary skill to coordinate large-scale projects. Public institutions should employ state-of-the-art tools from software development, such as  agile development, and place an emphasis on user-centricity and defining usecases early on. In many constellations, off-the-shelf software can enable a fast  rollout, and countries have been successful in adapting existing processes to  available software (not vice versa). Change management and, more specifically,  setting the right, optimistic, and problem-oriented mindset have often proven to  be crucial. EXHIBIT 3 | Success Factors for Digital Transformation Source: Expert interviews Five success factors are critical for the acceleration and successful  implementation of digital justice Digital justice  governance with  clear responsibilityGovernance Legal framework Strategy Budget Buy-in Supporting legal  framework for  justice digitalizationHolistic digitalization  strategy  at top levelSuﬃcient budget  for digitalization  initiativesBuy-in from  relevant  stakeholders  Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 17
18 The Future of Digital JusticeFinally, most large-scale advances have taken years and sometimes decades to  fully materialize. As the above examples demonstrate, it pays to start digitalization initiatives and pursue them continuously. All of our focus countries strongly  benefit from their past commitment. Some of them are able to punch above their  weight, reaping reputation gains and attracting businesses and commercial activity. These benefits can serve as a motivation for another success factor: stakeholder  buy-in and specifically high-level political and administrative support. For digital  justice reform, inclusion in a larger government-level strategy can be dispropor tionately helpful, and particularly high impact is often linked to bold ambition  from a passionate leader at the cabinet member or supreme court level. The Future of Digital Justice For digital justice systems to improve worldwide, we need to take two important  steps. The first is to describe the space of possible future digitalization develop ments so we can determine how far exactly we want to go. Then we must map  out the way ahead, with a full understanding of what it will require to get there.   Digital Case Management Online Filing Court Analytics Video Hearings Single Cloud Platform Mobile Signature for Digital Justice Services Mobile Infocomm Technology in Court RoomsOnline Dispute Resolution Self-Service Solution Explorer Justice Chatbot 4 5 6 7 8 9 101 2 3Key solution Layer Substantive  Law  Solutions Support  Process  Solutions Enabler 123 A country comparison reveals major potential for improvement in GermanyEXHIBIT 4 | Country Comparison Source: Expert interviews, BCG analysis & project experiencePartially covered Covered 18 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 19 A Vision for a Future Justice System As the international best practices in our focus countries demonstrate, meaning ful progress toward digital justice systems is possible and desirable, but getting  there requires resources and perseverance. Both are substantially easier to  acquire and maintain when following a clear vision. We have therefore asked our  interview partners to describe their ideal version of the future: The justice system of the future is rooted in the fundamental values and achievements of civilization that are the components of a modern understanding of the  rule of law: Equality before the law, laws that are publicly disclosed, transparent,  and applied proactively (never retroactively), consistent laws and processes, and  an independent judiciary. In these regards, it mirrors current justice systems, but  it also improves and repairs current systems that cannot handle increasing legal  complexity (see above).  In the future, courts will no longer be only physical locations and centralized  institutions that require personal interaction and primarily synchronous communication. Instead, all legal disputes will be initiated online, just as the vast major ity of conflicts are settled without a physical hearing. When required by the court,  trials will be held in person, but the default would be remote participation,  thereby avoiding lengthy commutes and potentially intimidating situations for  parties. As businesses—accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic—are shifting  toward remote work, people have become increasingly comfortable with conducting important business from home. As a result, remote interactions are no longer  conceived as informal, and therefore remote hearings do not impede proper legal  assessment of a case or lead to a lack of respect for the court. On the contrary,  Self-service  solution  explorer EXHIBIT 5 | Fully Digital Online Courts Source: Adapted from "Online Courts and the Future of Justice" by Richard Susskind 2019, Expert interviewsOnline ADR/  NegotiationOnline ﬁlingAssessment  of case facts   and legal  decisionHearing Evidence  submissionEnforcement Flow of future court proceedings Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 19
20 The Future of Digital Justice appearing in court may become more similar to people’s day-to-day interactions,  boosting trust as the justice system grows more and more approachable. This  includes a shift toward asynchronous communication as the default to accommo date changing schedules and decreasing planability of people’s days, again mir roring a wider societal development in which young generations prefer text over  communication via phone or in person. When it is beneficial to the solution of  the disputes, hearings will be conducted in virtual reality. This will allow judges  and parties to experience relevant details more directly and go beyond possibilities in the physical space. In order to improve accessibility, court processes will be designed in a more  user-centric manner. This includes self-service tools to understand the law and  explore potential legal remedies and procedures without the need for professional assistance. Since lawyers and judges might not be required for many runof-the-mill cases, they could focus their attention and time on more complicated  conflicts or, if the parties prefer, decision by judge and representation by a lawyer.  Proper legal representation is undoubtedly an achievement of modern legal systems, but it seems unlikely that the current one-size-fits-all approach is the best  allocation of legal advice. Instead, expert systems could help determine the most  appropriate process for a party seeking resolution of a legal conflict. EXHIBIT 6 | Path toward the Future of Justice for a leading country Source: Expert interviews Path towards the future of justice for a country leading in digitization Digitalization of  existing court  processes through  automation and  standardizationOptimization of  processes through  focus on user  centricity and data  analyticsIntegration of single  solutions to a  platform with one  interface and seamless E2E processesIntroduction of new  digital facilities such  as virtual reality  courtsExclusively  digital  courts in  the distant  future Fully oﬄine HybridToday +5 years +10 years -10 years +15 years Fully digital Current  position of  countries  not leading  in digital  justice 20 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 21If a party then wanted to initiate formal proceedings, an alternative dispute reso lution or negotiation pre-stage could help sort out conflicts that could be settled  without the court’s full attention. This stage might be an automated, structured  dialogue, inspired by dispute resolution platforms familiar from e-commerce platforms, or a guided process managed by a human mediator, arbitrator, or case  manager. Those conflicts that cannot be settled would be subsequently filed  online using mobile-friendly interactive forms or chatbots that would automatically identify missing information and eliminate uncertainties. Subsequently, evidence would be submitted and hearings conducted as set out above. The court  would assess the facts, supported by tools organizing the process materials and  parties’ submissions, and apply the law using integrated legal research solutions.  Once they have formed their legal opinion, judges would write their decisions.  But instead of starting from scratch, they could use a draft created by a machine  learning system that was trained on similar past cases. Again, this would save  time and effort while leaving flexibility to refine the law if required. Finally, the exchange of information with those institutions of the justice system  tasked with enforcement would be swift, so that neither time nor information  would be lost. Judges and officers of the court could follow up on their decisions  (if desired), and enforcement data would help measure the effectiveness of past  decisions and inform future ones. Just like all other steps, enforcement officers  would use the same end-to-end online case management system to exchange  data and communicate with all other user groups, including parties, case manag ers, clerks, and judges. Wide adoption of this one central system would ensure  sufficient pooling of resources for its maintenance and further development.  None of the above design decisions are set in stone. Based on near-real-time court  analytics and by applying continuous, user-centric process improvement, a more  flexible justice system could be adapted more easily and faster than today. How to Get There The above vision of a future justice system, shared in full or in part by many of  our interview partners, currently does not even exist in the most advanced  nations. This raises the question of how to move toward this goal. As laid out  above, the process is lengthy and requires a myriad of interconnected decisions  specific to the individual justice system and therefore impossible to lay out in  detail. Some steps are generalizable but in turn depend on the current status of a  justice system. Advanced systems in countries leading in digitization can follow a clear four-step  plan and achieve fully digital online courts over a period of 15 years. They have  already mostly digitalized existing court processes, operate a case management  system, communicate via an online portal, and seamlessly conduct many hear ings digitally. Over the next five years, they optimize their processes, focusing on  user-friendliness and using insights from data analytics. This leads to a vastly  improved user experience, greater efficiency, and time to develop a digital front  door for self-assessment of cases. In the next phase, all existing solutions are  
22 The Future of Digital Justice integrated into a single platform, the use of which can then be made mandatory  without harming the parties’ rights. This dramatically reduces the requirement  for physical presence and allows sufficiently integrated data collection for future  developments, taking place in the final phase. The data collected allows for semiautomatic or automatic decisions for small and standard claims (comparable to  but more differentiated than today’s dunning proceedings) and faster processing  of larger, more complex cases. Once this stage is achieved, courts can set their  sights on more futuristic developments such as the guarantee of legal standards  and the development of court proceedings for computational law and self-enforcing contracts. Less advanced countries—including our case study Germany—are currently at  least 10–15 years behind the global leaders. If they continue their current digitalization strategy (or lack thereof), they are likely going to spend the next 15 years  on the digitalization of existing court processes and the improvement of existing  solutions. As the pressure to provide better access to justice grows with increasing  legal complexity, costs rise and they risk playing catch-up with new technology  and corresponding user expectations forever. Carrying on as they did in the past  is not an advisable option.  This report provides a very condensed  view of access to justice through digitalization and emphasizes its organizational and economic consequences. For  those interested in more details, we   recommend the following materials and  publications:   •Aedit Abdullah and Tan Ken Hwee,  Practice of Law—Courts in Law and  Technology in Singapore, edited by   Simon Chesterman, Goh Yihan, and  Andrew Phang Boon Leong, 2021,   SAL Academy Publishing  •Natalie Byrom, Digital Justice:  HMCTS Data Strategy and Delivering  Access to Justice, 2019, The Legal   Education Foundation  •Adam R. Pah et al., How to build   a more open justice system, 2020,   Science Magazine •Shannon Salter and Darin Thomp son, Public-Centred Civil Justice Redesign: A Case Study of the British Columbia Civil Resolution Tribunal, 2017,  McGill Journal of Dispute Resolution  •Richard Susskind, Online Courts and  the Future of Justice, 2019, OUP  •Jason Tashea, Justice-as-a-Platform,  2021, MIT Computational Law Report Our own analysis of and experience in  justice digitalization naturally goes   beyond the content of this summary   report. Please do not hesitate to reach  out to any of the institutions or authors  to learn more, discuss specific projects,  or request presentations tailored to your  particular audience.FURTHER READING 22 The Future of Digital Justice
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 23Instead, these countries could benefit from the experience of global leaders and  adapt their strategies. At the outset, this requires setting the ambitious goal of  becoming a leader in digital justice followed in turn by leadership buy-in, ideally  at the minister level or higher. Leadership in this context includes a clear prioritization and the development of a high-level strategy. A significant budget must  be allocated and multi-year procurement procedures have to be redesigned.  Developed countries, especially those with a thriving legal technology industry,  should tap into the private sector’s experience to reach results faster and improve  their quality.  The operational implementation can be guided by three elements: increasing  court efficiency, including the acceleration of proceedings, a clear commitment  to user-centricity, including modern software and process design principles, and  a near-term establishment of data analytics to provide the relevant information  in order to identify and address the most urgent problems. This includes the  establishment of a fast-acting governance structure, especially in countries with a  federal structure, in which conflicts with or between individual states risk slowing  the project down. Many countries set up specific digitalization agencies, but other  global leaders show that swift developments are also possible in the existing  infrastructure if intrapreneurs and innovation teams are given sufficient authority. Most importantly, data on the justice system is required, in as much detail as   possible. This includes court statistics and further empirical research on users’  expectations of the justice system toward its institutions, including legal service  providers, but it does not stop there: All legal information, such as statutes and  regulations, decisions by courts, and administrative acts, need to be as easily  available as possible. In the digital age, access to justice necessitates easy, unhindered access to information. Finally, the digitalization of the justice system requires comprehensive law  reforms and a meaningful redesign of the legal framework. This includes procedural laws, court organization laws, administrative orders, procurement laws, and  potentially remuneration regulations for civil service employees. Naturally, the  creation of new legislation and the amendment of existing laws is a strong suit of  justice departments, so they might spur into action here first. While the encour agement of law reforms is important and should start early on (given the often  long durations it takes for bills to become laws), the organizational and political  measures accompanying them should start equally early.  In federal countries, the legislative process involves cooperation between the  national and subnational governments, and bold, comprehensive justice reform  can require extensive coordination. Our focus countries Canada and Austria are  examples of the two winning strategies: regional sandboxes and competitive  experiments by single states such as British Columbia and national leadership  and pooling of digitalization resources such as in Austria. Federalism can be an  enabler for digitalization but should not be used as an excuse for lack of ambition.  Countries should have a strong interest in digitalization for another reason too. 
24 The Future of Digital JusticeIncreasing legal complexity and resulting rising costs can easily focus the discussion between the federal government and the states on financial aspects only. In  such a scenario, interests are naturally diametrically opposed as both sides want  the other to pay for more judges and clerks, courtroom equipment, and infrastructure in general. Justice digitalization, on the other hand, is in everyone’s  interest as the increase in efficiency can help lower costs and reorient the discussions toward productivity. Building a digital justice system is an ambitious task and requires technical, legal,  and management capabilities. Successful digitalization task forces consist of inter disciplinary skilled members motivated by the social impact of their work. Ideally,  they are a mix of both young professionals eager to leave their mark on the system and seasoned professionals with experience in navigating hierarchical structures and building lasting coalitions. Globally, the countries leading in digital justice are succeeding in part because they motivate their digitalization workforce  and reward those taking on the challenge of these transformation projects, turning digital engagement into career success. This unlocks a trove of talent as it  speaks to an ambitious and yet intrinsically motivated part of the workforce. CONCLUSION Pressure on justice systems in all stages of development is rising as the  complexity of legal relationships, rules, and disputes increases in a world  shaped by globalization and digitalization. This risks impairing access to justice  for both consumers and companies. As a result, trust in courts is eroding and  businesses are moving to jurisdictions that are capable of dealing with increased  complexity. The most promising answer to these developments is the digitalization of justice  systems. However, bringing courts and their administration into the digital age is  a monumental task. To make it a success, our traditional understanding of courts  and their procedures has to be rethought, and ambitious strategies have to be  developed and implemented. Administrations that accept this challenge can look  to three sources for guidance: globally leading countries in justice digitalization,  general government technology initiatives, and successful legal technology pro viders in the private sector. As demonstrated in our international case studies, justice digitalization provides  a huge chance for countries, their politicians, and their public administration.  They can distinguish themselves, celebrate tangible successes, and attract positive international attention and business activity.
Boston Consulting Group • Bucerius Law School • Legal Tech Association 25
26 The Future of Digital JusticeAbout the Authors  Dirk Hartung is the founder and executive director of the Center for Legal Technology  and Data Science at Bucerius Law School. You may contact him by email at   dirk.hartung@law-school.de. He serves as the corresponding author for this report. Florian Brunnader is a principal at BCG and focuses on insurance, digital, and  managing large-scale programs (transformations, PMI, DD). You may contact him by  email at brunnader.florian@bcg.com. Christian Veith is a former senior partner and managing director at BCG and chair man of the Board of Trustees at Bucerius Law School. You may contact him by email  at veith.christian@law-school.de. Philipp Plog is managing partner at Fieldfisher Germany and chairman of the  Board of Legal Tech Association Germany. You may contact him by email at   philipp.plog@fieldfisher.com. Tim Wolters is head of business development and strategy at German digital law  firm Rightmart and oversees the Legal Needs section of Legal Tech Association   Germany. You may contact him by email at twolters@rightmart.de. Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the contributions of all interview partners and in particular  all government officials of the countries featured in our case studies. They would like  to thank Crispin Passmore for very helpful guidance and contacts. Alexandra Pley  and Nikolas Wernecke were instrumental in conducting numerous interviews and  contributing important parts of the analysis. Special thanks to Lauritz Gerlach,   Lars Hamerich, Julia Storkenmaier, Sven Störmann, and Alexander Ulmer for their  invaluable input and sharp eye. They also acknowledge John Hogan for his writing   assistance and Ulrich Kremer for his design and production contributions. For Further Contact If you would like to discuss this report, please contact Dirk Hartung as the   corresponding author or any of the authors.
For information or permission to reprint, please contact BCG at permissions@bcg.com.  To find the latest BCG content and register to receive e-alerts on this topic or others, please visit bcg.com.   Follow The Boston Consulting Group on Facebook and Twitter. © The Boston Consulting Group, Inc. 2022. All rights reserved. 06/2022
bcg.com 
