



Government of Canada Strategic Plan for Information Management and Information Technology 2017 to 2021 - Canada.ca





























Skip to main content
Skip to "About government"





Language selection





Français
fr









 /
								
								Gouvernement du Canada







Search


Search Canada.ca





Search









Menu
Main Menu 

Jobs and the workplace
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business and industry
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation




You are here:
Canada.ca
About government
Government oversight
Information, technology and project management






Government of Canada Strategic Plan for Information Management and Information Technology 2017 to 2021

From Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat

On this page

About this document / what’s new
Message  from the Government of Canada Chief Information Officer
Introduction

Citizens’ expectations
Workplace and workforce evolution
Privacy and security
The enterprise approach
IM-IT sustainability and aging IT


The vision

Digital services
Open and accessible
Security
Enterprise management
Community
Workplace


Mission statement
Guiding principles

Principle 1: client and service-centred design
Principle 2: open
Principle 3: enterprise first
Principle 4: secure
Principle 5: cloud first approach
Principle 6: enable a modern workplace: anywhere, anytime with anyone


Strategic goals

Strategic goal 1: service
Strategic goal 2: value
Strategic goal 3: security
Strategic goal 4: agility


Strategic actions

Service

Service management
Cloud first
Technology modernization
Information and data sharing


Manage

Governance
Enterprise architecture alignment and practices
Agility and innovation
Sustainability


Secure

Defence in depth
Trusted solutions and services
Awareness and understanding


Community

IM-IT workforce
Modern workplace
Digital collaboration




The way forward

Implementing the Strategic Plan
Risks and mitigation strategies
Measuring progress
Staying evergreen


Appendix A: Government of Canada IM/IT modernization priorities
Appendix B: implementation roadmap
Appendix C: key performance indicators
Appendix D: roles and responsibilities
Appendix E: definitions
Appendix F: draft digital principles



About this document / what’s new
This is the first update to the Government  of Canada Information Technology Strategic Plan, published in June 2016. This  document provides insight into the digital direction being established by the  Government of Canada (GC). This  document  can be considered as  a directive.
This Strategic Plan sets the information  management (IM) and information technology (IT) direction for the GC and  identifies enterprise-wide priorities and key activities for departments,Footnote 1 including those that provide services to other departments. It is a key input  to the departmental IT planning process as an element of the prioritization  framework used to identify overall IM-IT investment and work priorities for the  GC. As part of this process, departments should use this document to internally  prioritize IM-IT investments and initiatives, and demonstrate alignment with enterprise  direction. 
For service provider departments such as Shared  Services Canada (SSC) and Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC), this  Strategic Plan identifies foundational priorities and activities that are required  in order to modernize service delivery and improve sustainability. Completion  of these initiatives will enable departments to partake in the enterprise  approach while moving toward digital program and service delivery for  Canadians.
This update addresses feedback provided  through consultation with the public in summer and fall 2016 and with the GC Chief  Information Officer (CIO) and Information Management Senior Official communities  in February 2017. This plan:

closes gaps identified through  public consultation in the areas of accessibility, open source and procurement
clarifies alignment with GC  priorities and strategies
clarifies areas that need  improvement
further develops the case for  change

This plan addresses the key message  from the GC IM-IT community that IT supports IM, which must support the  business. 
This plan also brings together the foundational  enablers of information, data, technology and security required to deliver open  and transparent government and improved services to Canadians.

 Top of Page


Message  from the Government of Canada Chief Information Officer

Digital capabilities continue to transform  the way individuals and businesses work. In parallel, a data revolution is  taking place that requires transformative action to support different forms of  collaboration. The GC must adapt to meet demands and expectations from clients,  stakeholders, partners and employees. This update to the Government of Canada  Information Technology Strategic Plan (June 2016) is an interim step to a  larger digital policy and strategy that is currently under development for the 2018  to 2019 fiscal year.
The GC delivers a broad range of programs  and services to individuals and businesses in Canada and abroad. IM and IT  support the government in providing these programs and services.
Over the last few years, the GC has taken  the first steps to shift toward an enterprise approach to managing information,  data, technology and security. This direction supports priorities identified in  recent budgets, ministers’ mandate letters, reports and audits while responding  to key drivers.
This plan creates a framework and sets  direction for the GC to become an open and service-oriented organization that provides  programs and services to citizens and businesses in simple, modern and  effective ways that are optimized for digital and available anytime, anywhere  and from any device.
Consistent with the GC’s first Strategic  Plan, the following 4 strategic goals frame the direction for the GC:

service
value
security 
agility

Four strategic areas of action will achieve  these goals over the next 4 years and beyond. Each area of focus, “service”,  “manage”, “security” and “community”, details specific actions and activities  that are currently underway or that represent new enterprise directions.
“Service” focuses on building  and evolving IM-IT foundational elements, including processes, practices and  infrastructure, to enable implementation of current capabilities, technologies  and solutions. Focusing on these elements will ultimately result in improved  programs and services for Canadians and better internal services for government  employees through development of a modern, reliable, interoperable and  accessible IM-IT environment that:

allows for secure sharing of  information and data 
improves the government’s  ability to leverage opportunities across multiple channels

“Manage” addresses how the  management and governance of IM-IT across government ensure that IM-IT  investments take advantage of economies of scale, demonstrate value and are  sustainable. This goal encompasses:

a strengthened governance  approach
the evolution of IM-IT  management practices, process and tools 
a focus on innovation and  sustainability 

“Secure” focuses on  safeguarding sensitive government data and ensuring that Canadians who access  online services can trust the government with their personal information. Security  involves:

layered defences to reduce  exposure to cyberthreats
increased awareness and  understanding to proactively manage such threats
protective measures to enable  the secure processing and sharing of data and information across government

As the shift to digital services increases  and the sophistication and frequency of cyberattacks grow, the GC’s defences  must also evolve. 
“Community” focuses on:

building a high-performing  IM-IT workforce that has the skills and mindset needed to work effectively in  an open digital environment
ensuring that public service  employees have a modern workplace, professional development and the IM-IT tools  they need to do their jobs

GC employees and the environment they work  in are vital because the GC’s employees are its greatest asset in delivering  the kind of government that Canadians want.
Progress toward achieving the 4 strategic  goals outlined in this Strategic Plan will be tracked, evaluated and reported.  As it evolves, the plan will require the government to make investment choices.  The plan will be reviewed yearly to ensure it stays up to date and relevant,  supported by an implementation roadmap to track and report on progress (see Appendix B).  Departments, through their departmental IM-IT plans, will detail how this  enterprise approach will be implemented in their organizations.                      
With this Strategic Plan, the GC has set  out a clear path to obtaining maximum benefit from the money it spends on  IM-IT. Implementing this agenda is crucial to ensuring that the GC is ready and  able to meet the needs and expectations of Canadians in the years ahead. 
This plan represents the last instalment  before we proceed to a broader agenda based on digital government adoption,  supported by the right technologies.
Alex Benay
  Chief Information Officer
  Government of Canada 
 Top of Page


Introduction
Digital capabilities continue to transform  the way individuals and businesses work. In parallel, a data revolution is  taking place that requires transformative action to support different forms of  collaboration. The GC must adapt to meet demands and expectations from clients,  stakeholders, partners and employees. This update to the Government of Canada  Information Technology Strategic Plan (June 2016) is an interim step to a  larger digital policy and strategy that are currently under development for the  2018 to 2019 fiscal year.
The GC is made up of more than 100 organizations  that deliver a broad range of programs and services to individuals and  businesses in Canada and abroad. IM and IT support the government in providing  these programs and services. 
In each GC department, IM-IT is operated  separately and focuses on fulfilling the individual mandate of the department.  This siloed approach continues to lead to:

inefficiencies through  duplication of platforms
incompatibility of systems and  data models
inconsistent service delivery and  standards
lack of information sharing
inability to find information
other factors

This approach has led to complex,  time-consuming and costly client interactions with government.
Similarly, the IM and IT workforces are  managed separately and in silos, leading to:

inconsistent and sometimes  limited professional development
greater outsourcing 
weak integration of roles and  functions that fit closely together

A whole-of-government or “enterprise”  approach is being taken to address some of these challenges through the  creation of a common IM-IT foundation as a first step. The responsibility for  delivering IT services to core departments is now shared between central  providers such as SSC and PSPC. GC cybersecurity is the shared responsibility of  SSC, Communications Security Establishment Canada, and TBS, in  partnership with departments. The Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat’s (TBS’s)  Chief Information Officer Branch (CIOB) supports the Treasury Board by:

developing strategy
setting government-wide policy 
providing implementation  guidance for IM-IT, service, access to information, privacy and security
establishing technology  standards for the GC

A number of priorities have been identified  at the federal level through recent budgets and ministers’ mandate letters,  Destination 2020, reports and audits. This GC Strategic Plan for IM-IT supports  these priorities by setting a path for continued evolution to an enterprise  approach. It also proposes to address additional IM-IT challenges by responding  to the following key drivers:

citizens’ expectations
workplace and workforce  evolution
privacy and security
the enterprise approach
IM-IT sustainability and aging IT


Citizens’ expectations
Citizens expect their government to be  open, transparent and accountable. They also expect their government to deliver  real and meaningful results fairly, efficiently and responsibly. Canadians want  and deserve programs and services that provide the best experience for them,  when and where they need it, and in a client-centred manner. This means that:

services are simple and easy to  access and use;  services are essentially user centric
data is shared and reused where  appropriate
interactions with government are  consistent 
there are connections across  jurisdictions (federal, provincial, territorial, municipal) where it makes  sense
services are digitally enabled  and seamless

Citizens value government that is open with  its data and other business information yet protects their privacy. Canadians accessing  and using open information and data generates economic opportunities and  increases trust and engagement in government activities.
Citizens want to be assured that  departments are using the best available information and data from a variety of  authoritative sources to make evidence-based decisions with respect to  policies, programs and services that affect everyone. In addition, they want access  to digital tools to better participate in policy and program development. 


Workplace and workforce evolution
Employees expect to have modern and effective tools that are interconnected, intuitive and accessible when and where they need them. The GC cannot properly serve  Canadians if its public service has outdated tools. Clients and employees are supported by updated business processes to make day-to-day work efficient and add value to their efforts. They want to be part of a networked workforce and want an experience that is open, inclusive, nimble and optimized for digital. Employees in a modern workplace need digital tools that promote collaboration, information sharing and increased productivity, and that are accessible to and usable by people with disabilities. 


Privacy and security
Cybersecurity is an ever-evolving aspect of  any IM-IT strategy and plan. Consolidating systems prompts important  opportunities but also leads to a greater “attack surface” that requires  enhanced security measures to minimize risks. Inconsistent management of  government networks and security profiles of government end-point devices (computer  devices that connect to the Internet) also have the potential to increase the  risk of cyberattack.
As the government moves to an “open by  default” culture, it must continue to balance openness and transparency with  the requirements for information and data privacy and security that Canadians  have come to expect. Greater investment in cybersecurity is  required to maintain these expectations.


The enterprise approach
Sharing infrastructure and information,  when appropriate, and using common IM-IT solutions to meet common needs is one  part of leveraging information and technology in an enterprise approach.  Another aspect is addressing requirements for security, privacy, interoperability,  accessibility and open information.
For Canadians, it is important to ensure a  consistent end-user experience government-wide, regardless of geographical  location. Issues of latency (delays in transmission), bandwidth, security,  infrastructure, service levels and other considerations need to be taken into  account in designing programs and services. 
An enterprise approach also means that the  size and complexity of IT-enabled projects are increasing as we move toward a  more horizontal delivery model. Stronger prioritization and authoritative  governance is needed to make enterprise decisions on IM-IT investments. Such an  approach will change projects where scalable and rapid deployment of IM-IT  business solutions to accommodate the size and complexity of various departments  is needed. These solutions must also be adaptable to meet evolving business  needs.
In support of the enterprise approach, a  new GC Enterprise Architecture Review Board (EARB) has been established to  further the “whole of government as one enterprise” vision. It is integrated  into the larger GC governance structure and looks at alignment of initiatives,  system and solution gaps and overlaps, development of new digital capabilities  and innovation opportunities, setting technology standards and providing IM-IT  investment direction.


IM-IT sustainability and aging IT
Information and data are growing  exponentially, and it is increasingly challenging to find, use and share these  assets. Modern and efficient IM solutions ensure long-term access to  information and data of business value. Such information and data must be  preserved to minimize the risk of it becoming obsolete.
In order to maintain access to quality  information and data, and to continue programs and services for Canadians, there  is a continued need to renew the government’s aging and mission-critical IT  infrastructure and systems that are at risk of breaking down. IT infrastructure  transformation is proceeding slower than anticipated; the complexity of these  initiatives has caused some delays and procurement is taking longer than  planned. Funding pressures are arising, in part, from stronger than forecasted  growth in demand in  digital government and from requirements to maintain existing IM-IT environments  longer than was anticipated. Chronic under-investment puts the government’s  ability to deliver some essential services to Canadians at risk. New mechanisms  are being established to improve stability of existing systems and services  such as use of cloud and other alternative service options to better balance  infrastructure supply and demand. While progress has been made to rationalize  applications, the  GC still operates over 8700 applications. In addition,  current system health indicators signal that more work is needed  to address the risks associated with aging IT. These factors make cloud adoption  difficult.
Effectively addressing these expectations  and challenges will require new ideas and approaches. Departmental CIOs and  their departments will increasingly be working with peers in other jurisdictions  (provincial and municipal), academia, and the private sector through existing  and new forums such as the Public Sector Chief Information Officer Council, the  Open Government Partnership, the Digital  Advisory Board and their supporting sub-committees  and working groups to collaborate, learn and work more strategically. 

 Top of Page


The vision
The GC is an open and service-oriented  organization that delivers programs and services to citizens and businesses in  simple, modern and effective ways that are optimized for digital and available  anytime, anywhere and from any device. Digitally, the GC must operate as one to  benefit all Canadians.

Digital services
Information and data management, IT and cybersecurity  are enablers for GC digital services and play critical roles in achieving this  vision.
IM-IT solutions are connected and  interoperable, and facilitate:

information and data sharing
“big data” analytics
collaboration 
an open-by-default approach
user centric development
adoption of open standards

These solutions enable the use of high-quality  government data to inform decisions and identify innovative approaches to  public policy. The use of enabling technologies such as cloud and social media  offer additional ways to engage with Canadians and the world.


Open and accessible
Information and data are available,  accessible and proactively released to generate economic opportunities and  increase trust and engagement in government activities. 
GC digital services and internal tools are  accessible and inclusive by design, reducing barriers for users with  disabilities. Federal departments continue to seek out partnerships and work  collaboratively with public and private sector organizations that are responsible  for enhancing accessibility to advance mutual efforts in IM-IT accessibility.
The principles of open by default and  inclusive by design are integrated into all new processes, systems, solutions  and services.
The GC takes advantage of the increasing  number of opportunities to develop policies and solutions “in the open” and in  collaboration with stakeholders.


Security
Risks related to cybersecurity and aging IT  have been reduced through the implementation of proactive measures to reduce  the threat surface of Internet-connected networks and improved controls over access  to government-held information. The completion of IT infrastructure transformation  activities ensures that hardware, software and supporting processes are in  place with funded renewal plans, ensuring long-term sustainability. These  measures reassure Canadians and others who access GC digital services that they  can trust the government with their personal and business information.


Enterprise management
Project investments:

address business problems and  opportunities
align strategically with the  direction for the GC-wide enterprise architecture
are effectively managed through  best practices that are:
        	
applied to project management  and governance 
gained from lessons learned  from previous projects’ concept-to-benefits realization



Achieving investment  goals will be through reviewing investment concept cases early, prior to defining  the solution or the project to implement the solution, allowing for early  engagement and direction setting and for periodic reviews by the GC EARB. For high-risk  project investments, TBS monitors and reports on performance and governance  throughout the life of the project. Better  management of project investments, coupled with an agile approach to developing  and delivering projects and solutions, will maximize value and reduce service  delivery costs, enabling the government to respond more rapidly to emerging  issues. 


Community
Strong CIO leadership improves:

recruitment
development of the IM, IT and cybersecurity  community
retention of talent

The community is diverse, collaborative,  agile and service-oriented in support of the shift to digital service delivery.


Workplace
The federal public service is highly  connected, with information, technology and security integrating seamlessly into  daily work life. Efficient digital processes have rendered paper records  obsolete. Public servants can easily find, use and share their documents. A  common, customizable digital workspace follows public servants and allows them  to work smarter and solve problems more effectively by providing secure, agile,  accessible, and reliable systems and tools for information sharing,  collaboration and innovation. Information and data management practices are  automated and made invisible as much as possible to the average public servant.
Much work is required to achieve a truly  digital public service mindset where programs and services are designed for  digital first, policy development approaches are open and innovative and  Canadians are actively engaged.
Figure 1 outlines the framework for the  Strategic Plan.

Figure 1: framework for the GC Strategic Plan for IM-IT


Figure 1 - Text version
This framework describes the mission,  guiding principles, goals and strategic actions that are laid out within the  Government of Canada Strategic Plan for Information Management and Information  Technology.
The mission statement is “Federal IT  professionals are strategic partners and integrators within our departments,  providing excellence in IM and IT services and enabling delivery of secure,  reliable accessible and agile digital business solutions. Working openly and  collaboratively with external partners, stakeholders and across various levels  of government, our efforts:

add value in the workplace
advance risk and evidence-based  decision making
contribute to better programs  and services for Canadians
create opportunities for  innovation

There are six guiding principles:

client and service-centred  design
open
enterprise first
secure
cloud first approach
enable a modern workplace:  anywhere, anytime, with anyone

The four strategic goals along with the  mission statement set the direction for the GC Strategic Plan for IM-IT.

ServiceA responsive, open  and innovative IM-IT environment supports the delivery of integrated,  accessible, client-centred programs and services to Canadians
ValueSmart investments are  high in value, cost-effective, reusable, and aligned with business outcomes
SecurityA secure and  resilient enterprise infrastructure protects information and data, and enables  the trusted delivery of programs and services
AgilityAn agile, connected  and high-performing workforce with modern tools

The strategic actions associated with the  goals represent a range of activities, from core operating requirements to  forward-looking and strategic initiatives. They are organized into categories  based on themes.

Service includes service  management; cloud first; technology modernization; and information and data  sharing.
Manage includes governance;  enterprise architecture alignment and practices; agility and innovation; and  sustainability.
Security includes defence in  depth; trusted solutions and services; and awareness and understanding.
Community includes information  management and information technology workforce; modern workplace; and digital  collaboration.




 Top of Page


Mission statement
Federal IM-IT professionals are strategic  partners and integrators within our departments, providing excellence in IM and  IT services and enabling delivery of secure, reliable, accessible and agile  digital business solutions. Working openly and collaboratively with external  partners, stakeholders and across various levels of government, our efforts:

add value in the workplace
advance risk and evidence-based  decision making
contribute to better programs  and services for Canadians
create opportunities for  innovation

 Top of Page


Guiding principles

Principle 1: client and  service-centred design
GC solutions and services are designed from  a client-centred and end-to-end digital service delivery perspective to  increase the value they bring to clients through:

early user engagement
convenient access and  availability through multiple channels
pre-population of information  when possible and where appropriate
simplified, streamlined and joined-up  workflows
reuse of information where  appropriate
rigorous user testing



Principle 2: open
GC information and data is open by default, ensuring that:

information and data are  made open to the public to the greatest extent possible
new processes are  designed to enable and facilitate proactive release of government data and  information by default
the public actively  participates in policy, program and service design
citizens are consulted  and engaged in government decisions and operations
GC employees work “in the open”



Principle 3: enterprise first
Departments will follow common standards,  approaches and direction, and use existing enterprise assets, such as processes,  data, contracts and solutions, as accelerators where:

information is created once,  reused numerous times, and managed GC-wide as a single-aligned asset that is  consistent, standardized and interoperable
solutions support the use of  open standards, are scalable and can be rapidly deployed
cost-effective and efficient  business solutions facilitate information and data integration, reuse,  management, sharing and analytics
common business needs are  addressed through enterprise or shared solutions, and departments stop  investing in departmental legacy systems and refocus efforts, resources and  funds on becoming ready to adopt an enterprise or shared solution and on  accelerating its implementation
efforts across the GC are more  coherent, integrated, secure and effective



Principle 4: secure
GC information is safeguarded for security,  privacy and confidentiality, is monitored to prevent leaks, and is protected  for future generations.


Principle 5: cloud first approach
Departments will explore “… as a service” (XaaS)  cloud services before developing solutions in-house. This includes private and public cloud  offerings.


Principle 6: enable a modern  workplace: anywhere, anytime with anyone
The GC strives to be an innovative  organization that:

provides its employees  with modern technology that supports information retrieval, use, sharing and  collaboration by making information and data accessible when and where needed
provides customizable  tools and resources with minimized learning requirements for users 
provides automated,  digital processes in support of better services
attracts, retains and  encourages public servants to work smarter and be innovative, greener and  healthier so that they better serve Canadians

Early thinking on new digital principles is in progress in  support of the shift to digital (see Appendix F). 

 Top of Page


Strategic goals
The overarching strategic goals of service, value, security and agility, along with the IM-IT mission  statement, set the direction for the GC Strategic Plan for IM-IT. The GC is  committed to:

offering responsive and  innovative IM-IT services that meet business needs, enhance the end-user  experience and enable digital service delivery
making smart investments that  ensure high-value and cost-effectiveness
ensuring a secure, accessible  and resilient enterprise infrastructure that enables the trusted delivery of  programs and services 
providing a connected and  high-performing workforce that uses modern tools


Strategic goal 1: service
A responsive, open and innovative IM-IT  environment supports the delivery of integrated, accessible, client-centred programs  and services to Canadians and:

aligns architecture and plans  to a “whole of government as one enterprise” vision
simplifies IM processes and  systems to ensure that they are effective, support objectives for openness and  relieve burden on GC workers
continues the enterprise-wide  approach to delivering IM-IT services
adopts emerging technology to  improve program and service delivery such  as artificial intelligence and blockchain



Strategic goal 2: value
Smart investments are high in value,  cost-effective, reusable, aligned with business outcomes, and:

encourage collective use of  resources, tools, processes and systems
develop enterprise-wide  solutions to address common business needs
ensure sustainability of IM-IT  systems and infrastructure
strengthen data governance and  accountabilities 
adopt more agile procurement  approaches, where possible 



Strategic goal 3: security
A secure and resilient enterprise  infrastructure protects information and data, enables the trusted delivery of  programs and services, and:

enhances security measures to  minimize risk
provides more consistent  management of government networks 
protects personal and sensitive  information
broadens awareness of cybersecurity  risks 



Strategic goal 4: agility
An agile, connected and high-performing  workforce with modern tools:

attracts and retains highly skilled  and diverse IM-IT talent
provides a technologically  advanced workplace that supports mobility
promotes digital literacy and  collaboration
pilots new practices, processes  and solutions that exploit information as a strategic asset
rethinks how data and  information professionals can help meet current and future business needs


 Top of Page


Strategic actions
The plan’s strategic actions represent a range  of activities, from core operating requirements to forward-looking and  strategic initiatives. Those  established in the inaugural GC IT Strategic Plan 2016 to 2020 maintained their  original numbers (1 through 47) to simplify reporting. Numbering for new  strategic actions begins at number 48. Some of these may require additional  approvals or funding to be fully implemented. Priorities for the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year are key  elements that enable the shift to digital service delivery (see Appendix A).

Service
The strategic goal of “service”  focuses on building and evolving IM-IT foundational elements, including  processes, practices and infrastructure to enable implementation of current capabilities,  technologies and solutions such as blockchain and artificial intelligence. This  approach will ultimately result in improved programs and services for Canadians  and better internal services for government employees by focusing on developing a modern, reliable, interoperable and accessible IM-IT  environment that:

allows for secure sharing of  information and data via  policy and possible legislative changes
improves the government’s  ability to leverage opportunities across multiple channels
adopts open standards, where  applicable

While these foundational  elements support all departments broadly, the science-based departments have additional  requirements for network connectivity, specialized tools and a data strategy so  that they can conduct research and collaborate with their partners and  communities.
The sections below list the strategic  actions that are currently underway and those that represent new enterprise  directions that may require additional approvals or funding to be implemented.

Actions underway
Service  management

1. Develop IT service portfolios and catalogues
2. Report on key areas of IT system health performance
48. Develop digital policy
49. Identify and prioritize SSC essential services
50. Establish SSC asset inventory and baseline

Cloud first

7. Adopt cloud services
8. Establish a cloud service broker
9. Offer public cloud services
10. Offer private cloud services

Technology modernization

4. Complete data centre consolidation and  modernization
5. Complete telecom / network consolidation
6. Reassess government email consolidation

Information and  data sharing

11. Build a platform for enterprise interoperability
53. Develop an application programming interface (API)  strategy
13. Introduce a government API store 
54. Enhance online infrastructure to enable  departments to release their data and information
14. Implement a platform for external collaboration
56. Implement GCDOCS
57. Migrate websites to Canada.ca and assess options for a single GC digital service  platform



Planned actions
Service  management

3. Implement enterprise IT service management tools

Information and  data sharing

51. Determine the feasibility of developing a “tell us  once” approach for government
52. Introduce a strategy for use of open source  software and open standards
12. Introduce a mobile application strategy and  framework
55. Develop master data management program
15. Advance analytics

Note: Numbering of the strategic actions above corresponds with the  strategic actions listed in Appendix B.


Service management
The more open, transparent and integrated  government programs and services become, the more they will depend on IM and IT  to deliver secure and reliable services that meet agreed-upon expectations.

Develop IT  service portfolios and catalogues (actions underway)
An IT service portfolio describes services  in terms of business value, including:

a list of services 
a description of how they are bundled  or packaged
a description of the benefits  they deliver

An IT service catalogue is a list of  available technology resources and offerings within an organization. It is a  tactical, operational tool that is intended to make it easier for clients to request  IT services on a day-to-day basis.
SSC and PSPC will develop IT service  portfolios and service catalogues that clearly articulate enterprise service  expectations for the services they provide, including:

service descriptions
ordering and provisioning  processes
roles and responsibilities
service targets 
associated reporting  commitments
pricing (if applicable)

SSC and PSPC will price their services to  facilitate the introduction of:

chargeback models
price comparisons of external  service providers
the adoption of cloud services

With respect to IT security, SSC will  establish expectations and provide the necessary information to partners for  the IT infrastructure that it manages through the service dashboards.


Report  on key areas of IT system health performance (actions underway)
Key performance indicators that focus on  operational excellence and delivery are critical tools in managing the delivery  of IM-IT services. Departments will put in place metrics for monitoring client  satisfaction and key areas of IT system performance (security, availability,  reliability and capacity). 
For the services they provide, SSC and PSPC  will:

set enterprise-wide service  levels in collaboration with departments 
report to departments on  performance based on these service levels
engage their clients to resolve  issues if service levels fall below targets

SSC will also report on a quarterly basis to  the Deputy Minister and Assistant Deputy Minister Committees on Enterprise  Priorities and Planning (CEPP) on key performance indicators.


Implement  enterprise IT service management tools (planned actions)
IT service management (ITSM) refers to an  organization’s planning, delivery, operations and control of IT services  offered to clients. Departments traditionally have implemented their own ITSM  tools. Such tools are expensive to implement and maintain, and the diversity of  tools affects overall ITSM efficiencies. Moreover, service request and trouble  tickets do not flow easily within and between departments and tool sets. 
SSC will put in place enterprise ITSM tools  and make them available to all departments. Doing so will bring consistency to  the practice of ITSM and, more importantly, reduce the cost and delays of  fulfilling service requests.


Develop  digital policy (actions  underway)
In order to remain relevant in the digital  era, the GC must move away from its traditional siloed and complex web of  rules. Citizens today have high expectations of government. These expectations  are driven by their interactions with a more digitally sophisticated private  sector. Government IT policies have not kept pace with this evolving landscape  and do not reflect current realities or future strategic direction. 
TBS will develop a new digital policy that  focuses on service to Canadians within an open and transparent environment that  is enabled by information, data, technology and cybersecurity to ensure that a  strong foundation can be leveraged to achieve business outcomes across  government and support innovation. 


Identify  and prioritize SSC essential services (actions underway)
As stated in the Federal Public Sector  Labour Relations Act, the GC determines whether “any service, facility or activity of the  Government of Canada is essential because it is or will be necessary for the  safety or security of the public or a segment of the public.” TBS, with SSC and the GC’s new Digital Advisory Board, will  establish a list of SSC essential services and identify top priorities.  Consistent with IM-IT governance, this list will be approved by CEPP.


Establish  SSC asset inventory and baseline (actions underway)
SSC will create an inventory of assets  within 2 years. The inventory will establish a baseline that can be used  to inform prioritization discussions at CEPP and ensure that work is focused in  the most important areas such as evergreening and managing organic growth.



Cloud first
Cloud computing, or on-demand computing, introduces  a fundamental shift in providing IT services. It provides access to shared IT  resources (networks, servers, storage, applications and services) through “pay  for use” models, similar to those used for traditional utilities such as water and  electricity. 
Cloud is best positioned to satisfy the  substantial need for agility and scalability of today’s unpredictable business  environments, and to improve the balance of supply and demand of  infrastructure. Cloud adoption will ensure that the GC can maintain IT service  excellence during a period of increasing demand for online services, and provide  timely access to accurate information to Canadians. Cloud supports the GC’s digital  and innovation agendas.
In the context of cloud and enterprise-wide  and shared solutions, departments have a duty to apply safeguards that will  enable them to retain uncompromised control over information they have  collected or created. 

Adopt  cloud services (actions  underway)
TBS has published the Government  of Canada Cloud Adoption Strategy to guide the cost-effective and secure adoption  of cloud services. Departments will choose cloud services from a number of  options that will include extensions to existing legacy solutions and private  and public cloud offerings. TBS published right cloud selection guidance to  assist departments in making these choices. They will need to consider:

privacy
security
compliance
data residency and sovereignty
vendor lock-in considerations
commercial risk
latency and performance
data transfer
integration

Departments will consider solutions that  employ software as a service (SaaS) before platform as a service (PaaS) and infrastructure  as a service (IaaS). 
To ensure Canada’s sovereign control over  its data, departments will adopt the policy that all sensitive data under  government control, that has been categorized at Protected B, Protected C, or  is Classified, will be stored in a GC-approved computing facility located  within the geographic boundaries of Canada or within the premises of a GC department located abroad, such as a diplomatic or consular missions.  Departments and agencies will evaluate risks based on an assessment of data  sensitivity and apply the appropriate security controls for cloud  services.  Examples of sensitive data  include personally identifiable information or program/business information.


Establish  a cloud service broker (actions underway)
A cloud service broker (CSB) functions as a  bridge between organizations and cloud providers. Using a CSB makes cloud  services less expensive, easier, safer and more productive for organizations to  navigate, integrate, consume and extend cloud services, particularly when services  span multiple and diverse providers.
A CSB’s key functions are as follows:

procurement
billing
security accreditation
networking
credential and identity  federation
application integration
customer support
vendor service-level agreements  (pertaining to management and skills)

SSC is responsible for providing a CSB quickly  by implementing contracts with cloud service providers, thereby enabling  departments to use a self-service model for providing cloud resources (computing  power, storage and platforms). SSC will be responsible for connecting the cloud  environments as extensions of end-state data centres, with a catalogue of cloud  resources pre-configured to the GC’s standards. All cloud projects will be  reviewed and approved by GC EARB.
PSPC is also responsible for implementing additional  contracts for services and must use the same demand intake process as SSC. PSPC  will work closely with SSC to leverage its suite of cloud broker functions and  infrastructure capabilities.


Offer  public cloud services (actions underway)
A public cloud refers to a cloud environment  shared by multiple tenants that are isolated from each other. SSC will direct  its efforts toward acquiring and brokering multiple enterprise-grade public  cloud services. Several of these will have a presence in Canada and be capable  of storing and processing protected data. Public cloud services will be the  priority choice for departments when choosing a cloud deployment model.


Offer private cloud services (actions underway)
A private cloud has all of the self-service and dynamic attributes of a  public cloud except that the services are for use by a single enterprise, in  this case the GC. Under this deployment model, the GC will be the only tenant  residing in the cloud. This model includes off-premise as well as on-premise  clouds that are managed by the GC or by a third party. 
Private clouds can be implemented as  pre-engineered commercial offerings or as tailored solutions that are engineered  and assembled by staff. SSC will direct its efforts toward acquiring the  former, with the latter being implemented when unique requirements arise.  Departments will use private clouds where needs cannot be met by public clouds (e.g. secret information).



Technology modernization
A technology infrastructure that is modern,  sustainable, reliable and robust enables horizontal digital service delivery,  collaboration and information sharing within the federal government and with citizens,  external business, stakeholders and partners. It is a critical component that  enables the GC’s shift to being client-centred and service-centred, with open  programs and services. 

Complete   data centre consolidation and modernization (actions underway)
The GC operates over 500 aging data centres  that support mission-critical and non-mission-critical business functions.  Consolidating these data centres into fewer modern and secure data centre  services is the most cost-effective way to address the government’s “rust out”  issue. These enterprise data centres will be designed to have backup and  retention capability as part of disaster recovery plans and in support of  business continuity.
SSC will enable the migration of  departmental legacy applications to segregated partner-specific locations  (called enclaves) within the new enterprise data centres. This migration will:

accelerate the closure of aging  data centres
enhance data security
minimize the financial and  business impact to departments 

To ease the demand for data centre  capacity, departments will reduce the number of back office applications to be  migrated. The extent to which the government leverages external cloud service  providers could also reduce the requirement for data centre capacity. 
Successfully consolidating data centres  depends on departments’ readiness to prepare their applications for migration  within prescribed time frames. Departments will work with SSC and other  government and external partners to ensure that:

mission-critical and other  applications are in appropriate environments
such applications are supported  with appropriate technologies and procedures to ensure their availability



Complete  telecom/network consolidation (actions underway)
To streamline and modernize the  government’s network infrastructure and services, SSC will eliminate unused  phone lines and migrate departments from outdated and costly legacy phone  systems to wireless devices and VoIP (voice over Internet protocol) service.
SSC will also work with departments to:

consolidate the 50 existing SSC  partner wide-area networks into a single enterprise network
establish shared network  infrastructure in office buildings that house multiple departments
secure and reduce the number of  connections to the Internet



Reassess   government email consolidation (actions underway)
Departments have traditionally operated  their own email systems, leading to business and cost inefficiencies. SSC,  as the service provider,  and  TBS,  as the enterprise business owner,  will develop a strategy for next-generation email services for the GC.



Information and data sharing
Interoperable platforms are the backbone of  data and information sharing, big data analytics and collaboration. By seizing  on these opportunities, government can create a modern workplace in which employees  have the enabling tools needed to keep pace with the expectations of the  Canadians and businesses they serve. 

Determine the feasibility of developing a “tell us  once” approach for government (planned actions) 
TBS will investigate the “tell us once”  approach for the GC from various perspectives to understand possible risks and  challenges including: security, privacy, IM and IT.
        

Build  a platform for enterprise interoperability (actions underway)
TBS will continue to  work  with stakeholders to develop a unified service approach and to create a set of modern integration tools called the GC Interoperability  Platform (GCIP). This platform acts as an information broker, enabling the  exchange of data and information between enterprise systems, departments and  governments.
The GCIP project will implement a central data exchange where information can be  shared securely and reliably between government applications. Three core  solutions for financial management, human resource management and information  management will be connected to seamlessly exchange information, regardless of  the technologies underpinning them. These systems operate on a “tell us once”  principle, where data is entered in one system and then reused by multiple  other systems, as legislation and policy permit, thus reducing the need for  duplicate data entry while improving data integrity and accuracy.
This work  will lay the foundation to link internal departmental information with  solutions for delivering programs and services and enable greater GC-wide  collaboration when designing digital services.
TBS will continue to  lead the adoption of a common GCIP to support information  sharing inside and outside the GC domain. This approach will enable business  process improvement within the government and across jurisdictions, leading to  improved program and service delivery for citizens and businesses.  
Through the creation and  use of a governance framework (policies, directives, guidelines and open  standards) for the GCIP, TBS will:

foster openness and  collaboration
promote digital services
advance enterprise  interoperability and information sharing across the government



Introduce  a strategy for use of open source software and open standards (planned actions)
The use of open source software supports  interoperability and information sharing and should be considered in the  assessment of IM-IT solutions. Open source products are publicly available, and  the availability of their source code promotes open and collaborative  development around their specifications, making them more robust and interoperable.  The use of open standards ensures interoperability between products and systems,  and maintains flexibility within the IM-IT environment. TBS will lead the  development of a strategy to set direction for the government on the use and  release of open source software and open standards that will be ratified by GC EARB. 


Introduce  a mobile application strategy and framework (planned actions) 
Canadians and business want to use mobile  applications to interact with government data and obtain government services. As  part of the overall web strategy, TBS will lead the development of a strategy  and framework for the development and management of mobile applications that  are easy to use and trusted that will be validated  through GC EARB. GC mobile applications will be identified on  Canada.ca and available through application stores.


Develop  an application programming interface strategy (actions underway)
APIs are used to reveal GC  digital capabilities and can be combined and reused to create digital services.  APIs are increasingly becoming the way to facilitate sharing of government data  and information and, as such, are foundational building blocks that support the  GC’s commitment to digital services. TBS will develop an API strategy for the  GC.


Introduce  a government API store (actions underway)
TBS will lead the creation of an API store  to support information sharing with Canadians, business and other entities  external to government. Departments have already made available a number of  APIs. The GC API store will offer a consistent means to discovering APIs and  subscribing to them. The store will provide API publishers and users with a  central, multi-tenant API management platform that includes:

a searchable catalogue
version control 
automated access provisioning  workflows

Operating under a self-service model, API  publishers will be allowed to sign up and benefit from “active documentation”  that allows them to drill into API definitions, try APIs and share their  feedback in the store’s forum.
Interoperability, mobile applications and  APIs are key elements to supporting digital services for the GC.


Enhance  online infrastructure to enable departments to release their data and  information (actions  underway)
Having reliable infrastructure in place to  ensure the maximum release of government data and information ultimately  results in:

a platform for Canadians that  enables access to open government data and information
the opportunity to meaningfully  engage on related issues

The long-term goals of these activities are  to deliver value to Canadians through open information and data that:

fosters greater citizen  participation in government
promotes innovation
creates economic opportunities

Canada’s Open Data Exchange (ODX) is an  organization that helps Canadian companies make use of open data. TBS will work  with the ODX to deepen insight into the commercial open data landscape and to  understand what challenges need to be overcome in order to make Canadian open  data companies more competitive.


Develop  a master data management program (planned actions)
In an open and distributed operational  environment such as the GC, there is a risk that business-critical data becomes  redundant, inconsistent and scattered throughout the enterprise. 
Master data management (MDM) can be defined  as the processes, governance, tools, rules and technology required to create  and maintain consistent and accurate master data. It focuses on common critical  data elements and establishes strong governance around them. MDM can eliminate  redundancy and inconsistency of data in an organization and ensure its quality  and control. It can provide a single, authoritative point of reference that can  be shared by many processes and applications across the organization. It can  also streamline data sharing and facilitate interoperability. 
TBS will work with key business owners (for  example, the Office of the Comptroller General and the Office of the Chief  Human Resources Officer) to establish a government-wide MDM program to formally  identify standard data elements and single authoritative sources for key information  domains, where appropriate.


Advance  analytics (planned actions)
Business intelligence involves creating,  aggregating, analyzing and visualizing data to inform and facilitate business  management and strategy. Analytics is about asking questions and refers to all  the ways in which data can be broken down, compared and examined for trends.  Big data is the technology that stores and processes data and information in  datasets that are so large or complex that traditional data processing  applications can’t analyze them. Big data can make available almost limitless  amounts of information, improving data-driven decision making and expanding  open data initiatives.
TBS, working with departments, will lead  the development of requirements for an enterprise analytics platform. 
TBS will work with departments to identify  a business lead to develop a data lake (a repository of raw data) service strategy  so that the GC can take advantage of big data and market innovation to foster  better analytics and promote horizontal data sharing.


Implement  a platform for external collaboration (actions underway)
Technology makes it easier for citizens,  academia, scientists, businesses and government to share ideas and information  and to collaborate with one another. TBS will lead the establishment of an  external collaboration service provider to host departments and provide them  with a dedicated workspace and computing storage for unclassified and  transitory data. Cloud pilot projects will test-drive requirements and determine  the most suitable platform to meet government business, information and  security needs.
TBS, in collaboration with departments, including  PSPC and SSC, provides departments with a secure platform called GCCollab to:

share opinions, information and  analyses
collaborate with external  partners, academia, businesses, other governments and citizens

While meeting the government’s requirements  for security classification, disposition and recordkeeping, the platform will  support an array of functions such as document sharing, co-authoring, assigning  tasks, organizing meetings and holding discussions.


Implement  GCDOCS (actions  underway)
Time and productivity are frequently lost  due to the lack of consistent tools and systems to help employees store, search  and find the information and data they need to do their jobs. Enterprise IM  solutions such as GCDOCS streamline and simplify these processes, but they need  to be configured properly to make back-end IM processes as invisible as  possible to users.
Automation can provide opportunities to:

simplify and streamline key IM  processes and practices
deliver a seamless user  experience that relieves burden on individual GC workers

Furthermore, implementing integrated and standardized  solutions across departments can help make it easier for GC employees to find,  use and share the information and data they need to do their job, while  ensuring consistent, foundational management of GC information assets. Information  and data can be leveraged to help departments achieve their business objectives  and meet their mandated requirements.
TBS and PSPC will enhance the  government-wide GCDOCS service for departments, including:

full deployment by 2022
broadening its integration with  back office systems 
piloting its use as a tool for  increasing the openness of government information



Migrate  websites to Canada.ca and assess options for a single GC digital  service platform (actions underway)
The GC’s Web Renewal Initiative will  improve Canadians’ access to GC online services through a single online window  (Canada.ca). This initiative will bring hundreds of existing sites into one,  designed to better meet the needs of Canadians. TBS will develop a new strategy  to set further direction on providing a single window to Canadians for all GC  information and services and create the conditions required  to transition to a single GC service platform.


 Top of Page


Manage
The strategic goal of “manage” addresses  the management and governance of IM-IT across government in a way that ensures that  IM-IT investments:

take advantage of economies of  scale
demonstrate value 
are sustainable

Strengthening the role of departmental CIOs  and enhancing the role of the GC CIO:

move to a digital GC culture
will further develop business  and IM-IT partnerships
enable stronger IM-IT direction  setting
influence community management

The sections below list the strategic  actions that are currently underway and those that represent new enterprise  directions that may require additional approvals or funding in order to be  implemented.

Actions underway
Governance

27. Establish enterprise IM-IT governance
28. Develop methods to prioritize investments in  legacy and transformation initiatives

Enterprise  architecture alignment and practices 

30. Evolve IT management practices, processes and  tools
31. Develop enterprise architectures for business,  information, applications and technology
32. Adopt agile approaches to implementing business  solutions

Agility and innovation

65. Establish a Digital Advisory Board
66. Introduce digital government principles 
67. Advance financial management transformation



Planned actions
Governance

29. Document roles and responsibilities for IT and IT  security
58. Introduce stronger project oversight at the  concept phase 
59. Establish data governance

Enterprise  architecture alignment and practices 

60. Standardize metadata
61. Develop information and data valuation framework
62. Develop an information management performance framework

Agility and innovation

33. Lead innovation
34. Adopt modern and flexible business models
63. Provide tools and resources to make innovative use  of information and data
64. Shift culture and processes toward open by design

Sustainability

35. Ensure IT infrastructure sustainability
36. Rationalize investments
68. Develop process to balance infrastructure supply  and demand

Note: Numbering of the strategic actions above corresponds with the  strategic actions listed in Appendix B.


Governance
To fully embrace an enterprise approach,  departments need clear direction on agreed-upon priorities and approved  approaches that come from an authoritative source. Strong oversight is required  to ensure sustained progress in advancing shared objectives. Roles and  responsibilities must be documented for effective implementation of an IM-IT  governance structure.

Establish enterprise IM-IT  governance (actions underway)
Adopting an enterprise approach requires  sound governance structures that support clear and informed decision making.  The Deputy  Minister and Assistant Deputy Minister Committees on Enterprise Priorities and  Planning (CEPP) will be the governance, priority setting and oversight  bodies for all GC IM-IT investments. CEPP will also provide oversight on SSC  service delivery. 
CEPP will encourage departments to move  toward enterprise solutions for consolidated services. CEPP will establish the  “rules of engagement” for adopting enterprise IM-IT solutions and services, including  the process for addressing exceptions. As such, CEPP will prioritize all plans  for enterprise services.  
CEPP will manage demand from departments  for SSC IT infrastructure services and guide how SSC provides those supply-side  services. SSC will report to CEPP on its progress with transformation efforts  and bring forward annually an investment plan for endorsement in advance of  seeking Treasury Board approval. 
Through principles, prioritization and a  risk-based approach to balancing demand and supply, CEPP will align IT and  IT-enabled initiatives with enterprise business priorities. 
In addition, CEPP will provide direction  for and oversee the implementation of the GC Strategic Plan for IM-IT that will  be published annually in October. The Strategic Plan outlines GC IM-IT priorities  and serves as the basis for SSC’s planning. CEPP’s Terms of Reference,  including mandates, authorities and accountabilities, are being reviewed  accordingly.
All the business needs of government will  be managed according to IM-IT governance principles. Under CEPP leadership, TBS  will:

clearly define the key roles of  business owner, service provider and client
clarify with the CIO Council  and the Enterprise Architecture Review Board how existing governance structures  will be integrated into the IM-IT governance structure 
determine an appropriate  decision-making process
see that departments avoid  duplication and unnecessary overlap



Develop methods to prioritize  investments in legacy and transformation initiatives (actions underway)
SSC and PSPC will develop and define  methods to measure the progress of transformation initiatives, aligning them  with key benefits. Progress must be reported clearly and reliably. 
TBS, supported by SSC and other departments,  and under CEPP’s oversight and direction, will develop a methodology to  prioritize and allocate funding for investments in legacy and transformation  initiatives. SSC will also develop a clear process to address funding and  capacity deficiencies. Methodologies and processes will be refined periodically  to ensure accurate determination and reporting of savings. These processes will  be integrated into enterprise planning initiatives.
CEPP endorses a principles-based approach and  prioritization methodology to guide departmental investment strategies,  ensuring that they reflect business and enterprise priorities. New or  significant changes to IM-IT and IT-enabled projects will be subject to  consultation with TBS and approval by CEPP.
As the GC shifts to a digital policy and  strategy, its enterprise IM-IT governance, planning, prioritization and project  management processes will evolve.


Document  roles and responsibilities for IT and IT security (planned actions)
Departments have a role in managing and  delivering IT, as described in Appendix D. TBS will work to elaborate and  document the roles and responsibilities of departments, SSC, PSPC and central  agencies for delivering IT services and implementing the government’s IM-IT Strategic  Plan so that roles and responsibilities are clearly defined, communicated and  executed. They will be clarified through the revised policies on government  security, IM and IT. TBS will also continue to provide clear direction to  departments on IT security roles and responsibilities, including  security-control objectives and other security-related requirements.


Introduce  stronger project oversight at the concept phase (planned actions)
TBS will enhance and strengthen the  oversight function for IT-enabled projects by introducing earlier reviews of  investment concept cases. Such reviews will take place prior to defining the  solution or the project to implement the solution, allowing for early  engagement and setting of direction. Concept cases will also be reviewed and  assessed by the GC EARB for alignment with the GC business capability  model.
For high-risk project investments, TBS will  monitor and report on performance and governance throughout the life of the  project. Better management of project investments, coupled with an agile  approach to development and delivery, maximizes value and reduces service  delivery costs, enabling the government to respond more rapidly to emerging  issues.     


Establish  data governance (planned actions)
The GC is committed to making better use of  data to inform decision making. To do so, the GC must ensure that the maximum  value possible can be extracted from the large quantities of data that  departments collect in support of providing their individual programs and  services. Currently, data is fragmented and stored in departmental or program  silos, with minimal infrastructure in place to support sharing among  stakeholders and to effectively manage the data across its lifetime. 
Many departments collect and use similar or  related data, but no coherent government-wide approach to managing data is in  place for providing services that stretch across departments and jurisdictions.  Ownership for individual datasets is often not clear, and business development  processes do not sufficiently consider other potential uses of data collected.  In order to ensure informed decision making based on enterprise-wide data, the  government needs to take steps to ensure the sound governance of data and its  integrity and quality. 
TBS will work with data creators and user communities  to define governance principles that assign formal accountabilities for  individual data assets.



Enterprise architecture alignment  and practices
Sound IM-IT management starts with  consistent planning based on documented descriptions of the enterprise. With an  understanding of what is in play, managers can adopt solutions that best  address their business needs while advancing government-wide architecture.

Evolve  IT management practices, processes and tools (actions underway)
CIOs should plan and execute departmental IT  plans so that they align with the GC’s Strategic Plan for IM-IT and overall  enterprise modernization priorities. Important tools to support CIOs include: 

investment plans
architectural reviews
application portfolio  management
expenditure reporting
performance reporting

Optimizing IM-IT investments to meet  business outcomes will propel the evolution of IM-IT management processes and  tools. TBS policy and guidance will allow departments to:

manage IM-IT consistently and  with greater maturity 
better understand IM-IT at the  enterprise level 
evolve digital service delivery
benchmark themselves against  similar departments 
monitor and track progress  against government priorities 
set future priorities 

TBS will also provide policy guidance and  more robust project oversight to help departments:

develop sound project cost  estimates 
implement good project  management practices for complex IM-IT projects
guide investments from concept  to benefits realization



Develop enterprise architectures  for business, information, application and technology (actions underway)
Enterprise architecture will be used to  provide all GC departments with a structured approach to identify and describe  GC business needs and the information, applications and technology that are  required to enable them. 
Enterprise architectures show: 

the capabilities and services  being provided to Canadians
the information that supports  each GC service
the people impacted by business  decisions
the secure enabling  applications and technologies for each GC service

Understanding enterprise architecture  enables effective decision making about IM-IT investments, costs and risks, allowing  the GC to act as one to optimize performance and deliver on government  priorities in the digital era. 
Working with functional communities, TBS will  lead the development of an enterprise architecture framework, including an  GC EARB  that is integrated with IM-IT governance. The GC EARB, with representation of  business and technology stakeholders from across the GC, will work  collaboratively to simplify the GC IM-IT environment by:

assessing alignment of  initiatives
identifying opportunities for  reusing solutions that support similar needs
developing new digital  capabilities and innovation opportunities
setting standards for GC  technology 
providing direction on IM-IT  investment



Adopt agile approaches to  implementing business solutions (actions  underway)
It is a challenge to be able to acquire  goods and services in a timely manner to operationalize government mandates  that provide value to citizens. TBS and PSPC are leading a government-wide  initiative to identify and support key improvements in the federal procurement  regime. 
Departments will take advantage of existing  multi-departmental contracts when investing in solutions to meet common needs.  In cases where multi-departmental contracts or tools do not meet business  requirements, departments will contact TBS to discuss other options.  Departments are required to keep TBS up to date on their investments and plans.
Where a customized or in-house solution is  the only option, application development teams should take modern and agile  approaches to achieve greater speed and agility. They must also take into  account the increasingly complex ecosystem of interdependent software  architecture, infrastructure and processes. 
Departments will promote a learning culture  that allows solutions architects and developers to: 

understand and adopt iterative  development approaches, automate release schedules and embrace a layered  testing strategy, including automated testing 
increase engagement with  business colleagues to advance iterative approaches
engage functional (IM) experts  early in the development process 
adopt an approach that  considers a service-oriented architecture and application programming interface  (API) first rather than large and complex constructs 



Standardize  metadata (planned actions)
Metadata is the backbone of digital  automated processes, information retrieval, and the use and sharing of  information and data. Metadata defines and describes the structure and meaning  of information and data and of the context and systems in which they exist. Metadata  supports efficient and effective management of information and data resources  over time, which facilitates decision making, accountability and the efficient  delivery of government programs and services. 
Standardized metadata supports:

interoperability within and  across systems
reuse of information resources  within, across and outside the GC

Along with standardized metadata,  consistent use of authoritative vocabularies supports the exchange of  information and data resources within and across systems. 
Automated metadata collection, creation,  use and reuse can greatly relieve burden on individual GC workers. 
TBS, in conjunction with business owners, will standardize metadata schemas and maximize their benefits to  simplify and automate metadata usage and make it invisible to users. 


Develop  an information and data valuation framework (planned actions)
Organizations that are information-centred  and information-savvy recognize information and data as valuable assets. These  organizations move beyond considering the business value of information and  data to determining its value in monetary terms. Accounting for information and  data as strategic assets, similar to human and financial assets, allows organizations  and its partners to maximize the full potential of all information and data. When  information and data assets are valued and managed as such, they can pave the  way for innovation and cultural change within an organization. As the old adage  goes, “You can’t manage what you don’t measure.” This also means that if something  can’t be measured, it can’t be improved. It is therefore important to quantify  the value of information and data through a formal methodology. Currently,  there is no common agreement across government on how to measure the value of  information and data.
TBS will test industry practices for  assigning value to unstructured information assets (infonomics) within targeted  domains and examine best practices for potential broader use. 
TBS will leverage data inventories as a  baseline for a systematic and coherent approach to the quantitative and  qualitative evaluation of data, including the use of industry practices to  quantify the value of individual data assets.


Develop  an information management performance framework (planned actions)
Considerable effort is expended throughout  government to produce coherent analysis and reporting that leverages common  metrics. Much of this effort is a result of inconsistent data definitions and  traditional measures of IM (for example, through the Management Accountability  Framework) that reinforce an increasingly outdated view of IM (recordkeeping). Differences  in the level of maturity of IM across departments place constraints on the  availability of quality metrics.
By leveraging the right performance metrics,  the government can better understand the impact of information and data  management on its business. More importantly, it can serve to elicit desired  behaviours on the part of departments and their employees. Designing metrics  that are forward-looking and closely linked to business outcomes can help  establish and better communicate the value of information and data.  Furthermore, by shifting the focus of measurement away from compliance toward  outcomes, desired behaviour changes can be fostered, including increased  information sharing and reuse and improved data quality.
TBS will develop a performance framework, including  a renewed Management Accountability Framework, that is rooted in business  outcomes and results and is aligned with emerging needs. Over time, this  framework will evolve into the digital policy performance framework.



Agility and innovation
The GC is transforming its IM-IT to better  serve Canadians, with innovation being key to delivering on this agenda. Successful  innovation combines creativity with process to transform novel ideas into  business enablers that deliver tangible results. It embraces experimentation  and intelligent risk taking, bringing new approaches that address existing  problems and leverage future opportunities. Innovation calls for collaboration,  both with new and traditional partners, to identify and break down any barriers  that prevent us from achieving maximum results. 

Lead  innovation (planned actions)
The role of CIOs is evolving from a service  provider to a full strategic business partner and digital enabler. CIOs are  innovation agents, business enablers and catalysts for enterprise  transformation. Departmental CIOs will be strategic business partners who bring  IM-IT to the table in innovative ways to address the department’s business  needs. To explore working in ways that are more agile, new opportunities with  various innovations hubs will be pursued.


Adopt  modern and flexible business models (planned actions)
To achieve a better balance between demand  and capacity, SSC and PSPC will adopt cost-recovery business models for some IT  services. Doing so will provide greater flexibility to provide agile and  effective services to the government. As an enterprise, departments will  achieve better business value by sharing IT resources, capacity and  capabilities. 



Provide  tools and resources to make innovative use of information and data (planned actions)
Departments have expressed a desire for  safe sandbox environments in which to develop and test innovative uses of  information and data. Departments expect that these environments are compliant  with pertinent policies (for example, the Policy on Official Languages and the Standard  on Web Accessibility). 
Encouraging exploration of new ideas in managing  information and data can bring the community together to experiment with  creative approaches and help the GC adapt more quickly to the pace of change.  By highlighting where innovation is happening, steps can be taken to encourage  and enable innovation for broader implementation across the government. Incubating  innovative solutions that create or exploit federal information and data can  also generate enhanced value for the GC. Furthermore, creating a clear path for  proposing new ideas could focus departments’ investment of their innovation  reserves on information and data pilot projects. With a strong commitment to  supporting innovation and increasing openness, the government can:

inspire the creativity and  develop the skills of future innovators
attract key talent to the  public service

TBS will provide tools and resources for  departments to test and make innovative use of information and data (for  example, support for developing APIs that enhance access to open data).


Shift  culture and processes toward open by design (planned actions)
To achieve the vision of a more  transparent, accountable and responsive government, an “open government” lens  needs to increasingly be applied to new or renewed program and service design and  at all stages of policy and program development and implementation. 
The long-term goal is to transform the work  processes and culture of the public service to one where programs, services and  information are open by design. TBS will lead work that includes designing new  processes, protocols and standards to enable and facilitate the proactive  release of government data and information by default.


Establish a Digital Advisory  Board (actions underway)
To benefit from a broader range of  expertise and experience, the GC CIO will establish a Digital Advisory Board made  up of CIOs in the federal, provincial and private sectors. The Digital Advisory  Board will provide advice to the GC CIO on IM-IT activities related to strategic  direction, service delivery and investment priorities.


Introduce digital government  principles (actions underway)
TBS will develop a set of principles to  guide digital development in the Government of Canada based on international  best practices. These principles will guide and shape how government  information, technology, and service delivery will be managed in a new digital  ecosystem.


Advance financial management  transformation (actions underway)
Financial management transformation will modernize the business model for financial management across the GC to support:

open and transparent government
better service for Canadians
evidence-based policy

The principal goal is to improve the business and systems of financial  management across the GC. Working with  departments, TBS will achieve  this goal by:

developing and applying policy  instruments (policies, directives, guidelines and standards)
building community support and leadership
aligning and overseeing investments
developing common solutions




Sustainability
Ensuring that IM-IT investments are  sustainable and that they meet business needs will enable departments to provide  better services to Canadians.

Ensure  IT infrastructure sustainability (planned actions)
A sustainable funding model must take into  account the regular renewal cycle of IT infrastructure assets and the  appropriate level of investment. TBS and SSC will explore alternative financial  and service delivery models to address IT renewal. 


Rationalize  investments (planned actions)
In keeping with enterprise IM-IT governance,  spending on new or significant changes to certain IM-IT and IT-enabled projects  will be subject to consultation with TBS and approval by CEPP. Consultation will  include discussions on spending for systems for common business domains such  as:

case management
IM
human resources management
financial management
other back office  administrative processes
identity and credential  solutions
IT infrastructure and  associated solutions

Departments will take an enterprise  approach to managing their portfolio of applications to:

determine opportunities for  common, government-wide solutions
retire aging and at-risk  applications

Applications that remain in use and that support  mission-critical business functions are to be kept evergreen until they can be  replaced by modern solutions.


Develop  a process to balance infrastructure supply and demand (planned actions)
In addition to prioritizing projects and  initiatives, TBS and SSC will develop a framework to allow departments and the  government to access alternative service options where appropriate, while  maintaining enterprise standards. This approach will reduce capacity pressures  on SSC while allowing departments to continue progressing with projects,  programs and service delivery.


 Top of Page


Secure
The strategic goal of “secure” focuses on safeguarding  sensitive government data and ensuring that Canadians accessing online services  can trust the government with their personal information. As the shift to  digital services increases and the sophistication and frequency of cyberattacks  grow, the GC’s defences must also evolve. Policy changes will be made to  strengthen the security of the GC’s IM-IT environment.
The strategic actions outlined below align  with Communications Security Establishment Canada’s (CSE’s) top 10 security  practices and with industry best practices. Departments will use CSE’s top 10 practices  to prioritize their IT security actions that will support the elimination of  active cyberthreats on government networks. 
The sections below list the strategic  actions that are currently underway and those that represent new enterprise  directions that may require additional approvals or funding in order to be  implemented.

Actions underway
Defence in  depth

18. Implement an enterprise approach to vulnerability  and patch management
19. Manage and control administrative privileges

Trusted solutions and  services

20. Protect web transactions to and from  external-facing websites
22. Implement a trusted digital identity for people  accessing internal government networks and systems



Planned actions
Defence in  depth

16. Secure the government’s network perimeter
17. Implement end-point security profiles

Trusted  solutions and services

21. Implement an improved cyber-authentication service
23. Implement a secure communication service for  classified information
24. Implement enterprise data loss prevention

Awareness and  understanding

25. Enable comprehensive understanding of end-point  devices
26. Enhance awareness of enterprise cybersecurity  threat and risk environment

Note: Numbering of the strategic actions above corresponds with the  strategic actions listed in Appendix B.


Defence in depth
Canada’s competitive advantage, its economic  prosperity and its national security depend on government adopting new and  accessible technologies to better serve Canadians and public service employees.  If not managed well, however, making information and data more open could risk  exposing networks, systems, devices and data, including personal information,  vulnerable to malicious or accidental breaches. This is just one reason why  strengthening IT security is paramount. 

Secure  the government’s network perimeter (planned actions)
Although the Internet is a game changer in  how public service employees access and share information, it also brings  considerable risk. Malicious software (malware) can be unknowingly downloaded  from websites or through email and seriously compromise IM-IT systems and  disrupt government operations. 
To protect the government’s network,  world-class monitoring services and defensive measures have been implemented at  the government’s network perimeter through SSC-managed gateways. The completion  of network consolidation projects will ensure that all SSC partners use these  gateways. There remain, however, departments that continue to use non-SSC  networks to access the Internet. 
To address risks to its network, the GC is  standardizing protection and creating a secure, government-wide network  perimeter. Departments that do not currently use SSC Internet services will be  migrated to the SSC-managed enterprise network and will use SSC Internet  services exclusively. 
TBS, CSE and SSC will establish additional trusted  interconnection points between the government network and external partners to:

provide standardized and secure  connectivity with external partners and the Internet
act as a gateway to cloud  services

These actions will reduce the risk of  rogue, ad hoc or unauthorized Internet connections to and from the government’s  networks. They will also enhance the government’s ability to defensively  monitor data that crosses the government perimeter and ensure maximum protection  of government information assets.


Implement  end-point security profiles (planned actions)
Malicious parties frequently seek out  exposed or misconfigured Internet-facing services or equipment to gain access  to IM-IT systems and information. End-point devices such as laptop computers,  tablets and servers provide a doorway for such threats. Malware, rootkits (software  tools to gain control of a system) and phishing can lead to the loss and  compromise of government data, including personal information. Operating  systems and applications that use default configuration settings typically  include unnecessary components, services and options. These default settings  are well known and easily discovered using automated tools.
In the enterprise context, weaknesses and  misconfigurations in an organization’s systems could be exploited and used to  attack other organizations’ systems. Making the government’s end-point devices  more resistant to attacks is key to securing the government enterprise.
Recognizing the risk posed by misconfigured  end-point devices, SSC, in consultation with TBS and CSE, will develop end-point  device profiles. These standardized profiles will be based on security best  practices and will represent securely configured operating systems and  applications. The profiles will be validated and refreshed regularly to update  their security configuration. Additional security controls, such as host-based  intrusion prevention and application whitelisting (a computer administrative  practice used to prevent unauthorized programs from running) will be  implemented to further ensure the integrity of systems and information. 


Implement  an enterprise approach to vulnerability and patch management (actions underway)
The government must ensure that  vulnerabilities are identified and remediated quickly to minimize the risk of  future intrusion and potential loss. TBS and SSC will implement an  enterprise-wide vulnerability and patch management capability to systematically  detect and remediate vulnerabilities. Departments will:

implement these tools and  processes
meet standard timelines for  remediation
ensure quick response times for  emergency or critical patch deployment 



Manage and control administrative  privileges (actions underway)
Departments also need to manage internal  risks to the security of their IM-IT environment. Privileged accounts (such as  local or domain administrators and other accounts that have elevated access)  are the most powerful accounts in any organization. They are also the most  targeted by malicious parties that wish to compromise government information. 
TBS, SSC and departments will work together  to minimize the misuse of any account that has elevated privileges, either  malicious or accidental. Tools and processes will be implemented to ensure the  proper management, control and monitoring of such accounts, including  establishing strong authentication mechanisms for all privileged accounts. 
Departments will also implement  measures to manage and control the life cycle of and access to privileged  accounts, including:

audits and reviews to confirm  validity of privileges
continuous monitoring to look  for uncharacteristic behaviour 




Trusted solutions and services
Establishing identity is fundamental to  most government interactions that involve exchanging information or permitting  access to sensitive resources. 

Protect  web transactions to and from external-facing websites (actions underway)
As more Canadians interface electronically  with the GC, the amount of sensitive information transferred to and from  government websites will increase. To maintain maximum trust in these online  transactions, the government must protect them. 
TBS will establish an “HTTPS everywhere”  standard that will require departments to use the HTTPS protocol for all  external-facing websites and cloud services. This protocol, along with approved  encryption algorithms, will ensure the secure transmission of data online and  the delivery of secure web services. 


Implement  an improved cyber-authentication service (planned actions)
Currently, Canadians and others external to  the government can securely access government services online using a trusted  credential. The credential (a username and password) is issued either by the GC’s  GCKey service or by a private sector organization that has partnered with  SecureKey Technologies to enable their customers to use their online  credentials (such as card numbers or user names and passwords) to access GC  services. 
This mandatory solution for all online  government applications offered to the public is cost-effective, secure and  convenient for users. Still, improvements to the existing cyber-authentication  service are needed to support new initiatives such as Canada’s Digital  Interchange. Building on the existing solution and maintaining an enterprise  approach, TBS and SSC will develop a renewed cyber-authentication service. This  service will meet current business needs and support enhanced functionality  required for future federated identity and digital service delivery  initiatives.


Implement  a trusted digital identity for people accessing internal government networks  and systems (actions  underway)
TBS will take an enterprise-wide approach  to internal identity, credential and access management to:

reduce costs
promote interoperability
improve end-user experience by  reducing the need for multiple user IDs and passwords

Under TBS’s leadership, SSC will implement  common internal identity and credential processes and technologies tailored to  the level of assurance required for particular business processes. For example,  a unique digital identity will be needed to authenticate employees,  contractors, trusted guests or any other authorized users who access internal  government networks and systems.
Departments will migrate applications to  this new enterprise service when their applications are upgraded as part of  regular life-cycle maintenance of assets. 


Implement  a secure communication service for classified information (planned actions)
Every day, departments create, store and  process classified information. Failure to protect this information could lead  to:

national security risks
economic losses 
loss of government credibility 

Although several special environments allow  some departments to safely share classified information, there is no common  solution available government-wide.
SSC, under the strategic direction of TBS  and supported by CSE, will implement a single, common and integrated  enterprise-wide secret-level network to enable classified data to be securely  transmitted, stored and processed across departments. Classified voice and  mobile capabilities will also be implemented for users who need to regularly  discuss classified information. 


Implement  enterprise data loss prevention (planned actions)
With its responsibility for maintaining  large amounts of sensitive data, the GC needs to minimize the risk of  unauthorized disclosure. TBS will establish a framework to support an  enterprise approach to data loss prevention that will be supported by IM  solutions. Preventing the unauthorized transfer or release of sensitive  information involves first identifying sensitive data. Unauthorized data flows  and operations will be monitored, detected and blocked. SSC, with departments,  will implement the framework.



Awareness and understanding
Understanding the assets within an IM-IT  environment is essential to knowing what to protect and enables the government  to be more proactive and efficient when responding to threats and attacks.

Enable  comprehensive understanding of end-point devices (planned actions)
It is critical to be able to proactively  and accurately determine:

the status of all end-point  devices
what is running on them 
who is accessing them

End-point devices that pose a risk to the  enterprise can be identified, allowing the government to be more effective when  responding to threats and attacks.
Under TBS’s leadership, SSC and other departments  will acquire and implement tools and processes to enable a real-time,  enterprise view of the current status and configuration of government end-point  devices. Such information includes:

hardware and software versions
operating system versions 
patch installations

Authorities will be strengthened and  procedures established to mitigate risks to the GC network should immediate  action be required.


Enhance  awareness of enterprise cyberthreat and risk environment (planned actions)
Departments are accountable for managing cyber-risks  to their particular program areas. However, as the government adopts an  enterprise approach and programs and services become more integrated, it will  be imperative that cyber-risks are also managed at the enterprise level. 
Key to effectively managing enterprise-wide  risk is understanding the changing cyberthreat landscape (for example, who is  trying to exploit government networks and systems, by what means, and for what  purpose). Departments indicate a strong desire for a more proactive approach  for GC cybersecurity that emphasizes research and innovation in order to keep  pace with emerging threats, technologies and trends. Departments also have a  strong desire to work cooperatively to:

improve the GC’s security  environment 
reduce barriers to  collaboration and sharing of information

A better understanding of departmental  threat environments would allow departments to take a risk-based approach and focus  cybersecurity efforts and resources rather than attempt to blindly protect  against all possible threats. 
Cybersecurity is a new reality for GC  employees, and technological solutions alone will not protect the GC from cyberthreats.  All tools and technologies used in a strong GC cyber-posture can be undermined  by uninformed user behaviour.
TBS will establish a centralized capability  to conduct governance, risk and compliance management activities in order to  gain a holistic picture of cyber-related business risks in the GC. This  capability will pull together data from multiple sources, for example, threat  assessments, risk registers, investment plans, audit results and critical asset  listings, to feed a consolidated enterprise view of cyber-risks. One of the key  data sources will be the GC Enterprise Threat Assessment, which CSE will  refresh on an ongoing basis to keep pace with evolving internal and external cyberthreat  environments. 
The continuous monitoring of the cyberthreat  and risk landscape will inform decision making and influence how corrective  actions are prioritized across the enterprise to ensure maximum protection of  government assets.


 Top of Page


Community
The strategic goal of “community” focuses  on building a high-performing IM-IT workforce and ensuring that public service  employees have a modern workplace, professional development and the IM-IT tools  they need to do their jobs. 
The sections below list strategic actions  that are currently underway and those that represent new enterprise directions that  may require additional approvals or funding to be implemented.

Actions underway
IM-IT workforce

39. Enable career development
40. Improve diversity

Modern  workplace

41. Modernize workplace technology devices
42. Support a mobile workforce
43. Provide Wi-Fi access
44. Provide desktop videoconferencing to employees
45. Implement managed print services
74. Improve IM-IT accessibility

Digital  collaboration

47. Advance digital collaboration
75. Expand open government training and outreach



Planned actions
IM-IT workforce

69. Strengthen recruitment
70. Modernize information and data management  profession
71. Develop information and data management training
72. Strengthen leadership development
73. Lead targeted initiatives

Digital collaboration

46. Promote digital literacy and collaboration

Note: Numbering of the strategic actions above corresponds  with the strategic actions listed in Appendix B.


IM-IT workforce
Successfully delivering IM-IT services  requires a skilled, agile, connected and high-performing IM-IT workforce that  combines knowledge of business and technology. IM-IT professionals need to be  able to keep pace with the speed at which the business environment is evolving.  Today, the significant transformation of CIO organizations across the  enterprise continues, calling for a broader and more integrated range of  competencies in this increasingly digital and service-oriented work environment.  To enable a high-performing IM-IT workforce, 3 overarching priorities have  been established: 

evolve toward an enhanced  community management model
enhance the diversity of the  IM-IT workforce
advance transformation

Areas of action that support these  priorities include recruitment, consideration of diversity, career development,  leadership development, and targeted initiatives to source, attract, onboard,  develop and grow the IM-IT workforce. Partnerships, workforce analytics,  research and collaboration form the foundation that supports these activities.

Enable  career development (actions underway)
Further enabling IM-IT professionals to  evolve into new roles, and addressing competency gaps in areas such as  strategic thinking, communications, innovation, change leadership and agility,  requires investment in employees. To support IM-IT professionals, retain talent  and re-skill the workforce, emphasis will be placed on:

a career development portal
learning provider solutions 
a development approach for the  CS (Computer Systems) Group

TBS, in conjunction with the Canada School  of Public Service, will lead work in this area.


Improve  diversity (actions  underway)
An innovative workplace is one where the  workforce reflects the full breadth of the talent pool. Diverse teams bring  broader perspectives and ideas for greater capacity to find creative solutions. 
Currently, IT remains a predominantly male  domain. In Canada, recent data reveals that women occupy only 27% of the CS  population in the federal public service. Moreover, the percentage of millennial  women in the CS ranks has diminished steadily to a low of under 15%. Activities  to enhance diversity include focusing on recruitment and interdepartmental  action plans. Building on current efforts, specific initiatives include the  development of a multi-year action plan to improve diversity, inclusion and  representation via recruitment, retention and development for women of the CS  Group. To further support the government’s commitments to achieving greater  representation and a balanced and diverse workforce, departments will develop  and leverage partnerships with departments that encourage IT as a career choice  for young women. Departments and central agencies will also work to increase  labour mobility among women by encouraging leaders in the public service and  the private sector to consider roles in the government’s IT community.


Strengthen  recruitment (planned actions)
To address challenges that include branding  issues, shortfalls in capacity and competency gaps, the GC will focus on CS recruitment  campaigns, enterprise approaches and partnerships to support recruitment  efforts and onboarding. Specific initiatives will focus on:

outreach to college and  university campuses
onboarding tools and initiatives  to improve the integration of new recruits
partnership with the Public  Service Commission of Canada to create a partially assessed CS inventory

TBS, working with departments, will lead  work in these areas. Such initiatives will better position the GC to address  capacity and competency gaps more efficiently.


Modernize  information and data management profession (planned actions)
Revitalizing the information and data  management profession is necessary to ensure that it keeps pace with current  and emerging business needs in a digital, open and service-oriented environment.  Currently, HR classifications (for example, the CS Group, the Administrative  Services (AS) Group and the LS (Library Science) Group) do not adequately  reflect the knowledge, skills and competencies needed. Furthermore, information  and data professionals should be more involved early on in the development  process when designing or renewing programs and systems to ensure that issues  associated with information and data management and sharing are proactively  considered. Realigning roles and responsibilities of information and data  management professionals and other key stakeholders could help improve  collaboration and overall coherence.
TBS will work with Office of the Chief  Human Resources Officer to explore a classification standard for information and  data management professionals, including developing new standardized:

generic work streams and job descriptions
competency profiles
organizational structures



Develop  information and data management training (planned actions)
By themselves, new policies, processes and  technology will not bring the change needed to support digital government. As  the need for quality information and data to support evidence-based decision  making and digital service delivery continues to evolve, so too must the  competencies of the information and data professionals that support the  delivery of government programs and services. 
By broadening the scope of competencies and  the capacity of information and data management professionals to include  business analysis, enterprise architecture, digital citizenship and horizontal  skills, the government can enable them to meet evolving business needs. Also,  educating information and data professionals to speak the language of the  business side of government would help shift the overall focus of information  and data management from process to business outcomes, making information and  data a central part of today’s digital workspace. 
TBS will develop partnerships to design  learning and development opportunities for the next generation of information  and data professionals.


Strengthen  leadership development (planned actions)
There is a requirement to invest in current  and aspiring leaders across the enterprise to:

address talent retention issues
increase capacity to develop  leadership competencies
address gaps in skills

Emphasis will be placed on:

talent management and succession  planning
learning provider solutions
cross-pollination with  organizations outside the GC

Specific leadership development efforts  include:

talent reviews
promoting leadership  development programs at the Canada School of Public Service
tracking and facilitating the  movement of IM-IT leadership across the enterprise

TBS will lead work in these areas.


Lead  targeted initiatives (planned actions)
The role of CIOs and their organizations  continues to evolve, with a shift toward being a transformational business  leader, technology strategist and innovator. Today’s environment further calls  for experimentation and smart risk taking. To enable CIOs to become  increasingly influential in shaping the business and supporting innovation, a  number of targeted initiatives have been identified, including:

a talent cloud to increase  resourcing agility
strengthened relationships  between departmental CIOs and the GC CIO  

TBS, working with departments, will lead  work in these areas.



Modern workplace
Information and technology are key enablers  of a modern workplace that support collaboration, innovation and mobility. Ensuring  that smart technology provides a consistent, accessible workplace experience  throughout government will improve how all employees work together and provide better  services to Canadians. 

Modernize  workplace technology devices (actions underway)
Workplace technology devices are essential  for a modern workplace and a collaborative, mobile workforce, consistent with  the Blueprint 2020 vision. TBS will work closely with departments to ensure  that workplace technology devices meet the Blueprint 2020 vision.
TBS will establish enterprise standards and  processes for life-cycle management and set direction to guide future workplace  technology devices standards and secure configurations. 
SSC will continue to consolidate contracts  and procurement activities to improve security, reduce costs and improve  service to Canadians. SSC will also procure workplace technology devices and  work with TBS and other departments to standardize devices. 
Departments are responsible for supporting  and maintaining workplace technology devices. They will explore support models  such as self-service and regional clusters to reduce costs while promoting  consistent user experience and service expectations.


Support a  mobile workforce (actions underway)
The GC is committed to and encourages an  open and collaborative work environment where mobile devices are used. TBS will  develop a mobility strategy, focusing initially on smartphones. Departments  will balance the cost of these devices, and their support, against the business  value achieved. 


Provide  Wi-Fi access (actions  underway)
Access to wireless data networks is  critical for employee productivity. The broader deployment of Wi-Fi may also  reduce costs by displacing the need to provide wireline infrastructure, which  is expensive to install and maintain.
TBS and SSC will put in place the necessary  services and policies to support Wi-Fi usage. Departments will implement Wi-Fi  access to networks for all employees within common areas and their workspaces,  where the job requires mobility. Departments will migrate to Wi-Fi-capable  devices and support Wi-Fi access to local area networks for registered users,  as well as Wi-Fi guest-network access where security requirements are  appropriate. 


Provide  desktop videoconferencing to employees (actions underway)
Increased access to videoconferencing  supports the collaborative operations of virtual teams across departments, time  zones and regions. Departments will complete the re-engineering of their  in-house videoconferencing facilities to enable full interconnectivity across  the government. Where appropriate and where a user profile supports such  functionality, SSC will also create the network and bandwidth capacity needed  to support videoconferencing at desktops. 


Implement  managed print services (actions underway)
The GC will continue to improve the  sustainability of workplace operations by completing the implementation of the Centre  for Greening Government’s strategy for printing. Departments will achieve an 8:1  average ratio of office employees to printing units. Departments will also use  SSC’s managed print services to facilitate improvements in their organization’s  environmental efficiencies in imaging, specifically:

reduced energy costs and paper  consumption 
proper disposal of electronic  equipment



Improve  IM-IT accessibility (actions underway)
An innovative workplace requires all its  employees to contribute to their fullest potential and should attract the best  and brightest talent. Today, public service employees with disabilities  continue to face systemic barriers in the workplace, as information and  communications technologies are not as accessible as they should be, with key  tools posing accessibility and usability barriers to varying degrees. 
 In line with Blueprint 2020 and efforts by  the federal government in the realm of accessibility, TBS has established  an interdepartmental task group of leaders, experts and practitioners to  identify issues and propose targeted initiatives to address IM-IT accessibility  for public service employees with disabilities. TBS will also continue to seek  out partnerships and work collaboratively with departments that are responsible  for enhancing accessibility to advance efforts in improving IM-IT  accessibility.



Digital collaboration
Digital collaboration refers to the skills  and mindset needed to work effectively in an open digital environment. Tools  that respect government requirements such as accessibility, privacy, security, IM  and official languages will be used to promote digital collaboration.

Promote  digital literacy and collaboration (planned actions)
Digital literacy goes beyond basic computer  skills. It is essential to make the most of investments already made in the IM-IT  environment, devices and tools, and to ensure that IM-IT helps workforce  productivity rather than detracts from it.
Data literacy is a skill required for  working digitally. GC employees need to be able to extract high-value insights  from the wealth of available information and data and to communicate them. 
TBS will develop partnerships to leverage  and design an engagement and awareness program for all public servants to  enable them to:

become more data-literate
leverage evidence-based  decision making
engage internally and  externally as digital citizens

Public service employees should also be  able to use GCTools such as GCpedia, GCconnex and GCintranet to share  information and build the professional networks needed to respond to shifting  priorities and problems. Collaborating digitally involves “working out loud,”  where others can see, benefit from and help improve how employees work.
To promote a culture of openness and  collaboration, departments will nurture these skills throughout the public  service by:

adopting and using GCTools for  everyday work
deploying targeted and general  learning and community outreach activities
promoting the use of  self-directed learning tools and materials

Senior leaders’ adoption of GCTools will be  critical to successfully integrating digital collaboration into their departments  and to demonstrating the full benefits of these collaborative tools. Leaders  will adopt an “open first” approach toward content creation and encourage their  employees to participate in shared knowledge and collaborative digital spaces,  other than where security requirements prohibit such an approach.


Advance  digital collaboration (actions underway)
GCTools such as GCpedia, GCconnex and the  GCintranet enable collaboration across the government. Employees are able to  access and share information and work across departments and geographic  boundaries, resulting in better service to Canadians.
GCTools that support government  requirements for accessibility and official languages will be further developed  and integrated into other applications. These tools will allow employees to  easily connect with the colleagues and information they need to work  effectively. GCTools will connect to a digital workspace that provides  simplified access to other activities such as staffing, learning and  professional development.
TBS will make adopting GCTools part of  standard practices for employee onboarding throughout government. Departments  will then be in a better position to adopt and use GCTools through the  Ambassadors Network and in formal training and ongoing communications. The  Ambassadors Network consists of volunteers from various departments and regions  that provide support to teams using GCpedia and GCconnex to enhance their work.
Departments will decommission stand-alone  collaborative platforms unless they are linked to core local business  requirements. Email communication will be reduced in favour of open discussions  or instant messaging, where transitory communications can occur without bogging  down government systems.


Expand  open government training and outreach (actions underway)
Training and awareness sessions are being  provided to public servants across the federal government to enhance knowledge  and skills for open government. The training resources developed will be made  available through government-wide platforms, including through the Canada  School of Public Service and on open.canada.ca. 



 Top of Page


The way forward

Implementing the Strategic Plan
In support of the GC, the Deputy Minister  Committee on Enterprise Priorities and Planning (CEPP) provides oversight and  guidance on government IM-IT investments, supported by the Assistant Deputy  Minister (ADM) CEPP. Investments come forward through the annual departmental IT  planning process and are analyzed and prioritized by TBS and SSC in order to  understand demand and capacity. An implementation roadmap for the plan’s  initiatives has been developed (see Appendix B),  and financial analysis is underway to help determine the extent and pace of  implementation, particularly in terms of infrastructure modernization. This  roadmap will be refined as planning advances.
Information, data and technology can be  leveraged to support the culture change required within the GC to shift to an  open and service-oriented organization that delivers programs and services to  citizens and businesses in simple, modern and effective ways that are:

optimized for digital 
available anytime, anywhere and  from any device



Risks and mitigation strategies
Table 5 outlines risks to implementing the  Strategic Plan and their mitigation strategies.


Table 5: risks to implementation of the Strategic Plan and mitigation strategies



Risk to    implementation
Mitigation strategy




Lack of    capacity (people): There is a risk that the    government will not have sufficient capacity to implement the plan.
Some    strategic actions are identified as directional and can be deferred until    sufficient capacity is available. CEPP (governance) will provide direction    and oversee the implementation of the plan. 


Too much to do: There is a risk that the plan is overly ambitious and that the    government will not be able to absorb all the new work.
Some strategic actions are identified as directional    and can be deferred until sufficient capacity is available. CEPP (governance)    will provide direction and oversee the implementation of the plan.


Insufficient    funds: There is a risk of insufficient funding to    implement all strategic actions identified in the plan.
Strategic actions that are identified as directional    will not proceed until funding is secured. Those currently underway will be    assessed to ensure that sufficient funding is available to complete    implementation.


Failure to    adopt the enterprise approach: There is a risk    that departments will not all act in an enterprise manner.
CEPP will drive departments to move toward enterprise    IM-IT solutions for consolidated services and address exceptions. 


Retiring IM-IT    workforce and competency gaps: There is a risk    that the government will not retain its IM-IT workforce due to increasing    retirements and gaps in required competencies.
Impacts could be avoided by actions to strengthen    recruitment, enable career development, improve diversity, and invest in    developing leadership.


Significant    cyber-event: There is a risk that a significant cyber-event    could occur, delaying implementation of the plan.
The impact of such an event could be reduced through    measures such as:

securing the network    perimeter
implementing security    profiles for end-point devices to reduce malicious threats
implementing vulnerability    and patch management
enhancing enterprise-wide    awareness of the government’s cyberthreat and risk environment



Resistance to    change and insufficient momentum to drive culture change: There is a risk that employees will not want to or be able to    change the culture enough to drive the change agenda (for example, break down    silos, cultivate the mindset of “fail fast and iterate” (experimenting with    small components and building from the results) openness and collaboration).    Resistance to change, if not acknowledged and addressed, could delay or    inhibit the realization of expected results and outcomes, as culture change    is not a short-term activity. 
TBS, through advocacy and promotional campaigns, will    encourage departments to adopt the principles outlined in the Strategic Plan.    Providing skills training and collaboration tools will help develop the    desired new behaviours. In addition, policy direction and language regarding    CIOs as business partners and integrators will promote the required    behaviours over time.





Measuring progress
CEPP will provide direction and oversight in  implementing the Strategic Plan, including the monitoring of enterprise-wide  implementation risk. 
Progress toward achieving the strategic  goals outlined in the Strategic Plan will be tracked, evaluated and reported.  Key performance indicators have been identified for strategic actions (see Appendix C). The indicators will be reviewed in 2017 and  revised as required. Benchmarks and targets will also be established in 2017,  in consultation with departments, as will leveraging existing assessment  frameworks and tools, such as:

the Management Accountability  Framework
key performance indicators for  internal services
reports on departmental  priorities and performance 

CEPP will track the overall progress of the  Strategic Plan, and a yearly progress report will be provided to the Secretary  of the Treasury Board.


Staying evergreen
On an ongoing basis, CEPP will:

assess progress
consider the Strategic Plan’s effectiveness 
align resources with priorities  to get the intended results

Updates will be aligned with the new digital  policy and strategy and the annual departmental IT planning cycle, and will be completed  in September to allow departmental IT plans to reflect new directions.
Advised by CEPP, TBS will make adjustments  where necessary to ensure that the Strategic Plan:

remains relevant and aligned  with government priorities
addresses IM-IT issues
keeps pace with the  ever-changing digital landscape
assigns appropriate  accountabilities

By ensuring a strategic,  whole-of-government approach to the GC’s information and technology  investments, we will drive better service to Canadians, ensure that our  networks and information are more secure, and deliver better value for money.  We will enable the public service to deliver its best for Canadians.

 Top of Page


Appendix A: Government of  Canada IM-IT modernization priorities
The GC’s IM-IT modernization priorities are  used in the GC departmental IT planning process to ensure departments are  aligned with initiatives and spending at an enterprise level and to support  prioritization of projects and activities across the GC through the ADM and DM CEPP.

Top  priorities for departments in the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year
The priorities outlined in Table 6 will  enable the shift to digital service delivery.


Table 6: top priorities for departments in the 2018 to 2019 fiscal year



Priority (lead)
Strategic actions
Overview




Stabilize    legacy (SSC)
6, 35
Activities required to evergreen    infrastructure and reduce risks related to aging IT, including email    transformation.


Departmental    application strategy and plan for data centre consolidation and cloud    adoption (Departments and SSC)
4, 7
To support data centre consolidation and cloud    adoption, departments require a strategy and plan to facilitate the    transition of business applications from legacy data centres to new    environments.


Service    management
          (SSC,    PSPC)
1, 2, 3
Implementation of enterprise    service management processes and supporting tool set for consistency across    departments and improved end-to-end service delivery.


GC    Interoperability
          (TBS-CIOB)
11
The need for interoperability arises from the GC’s    pursuit of achieving improvements in the management and cost of government    operations and for a more transparent, accountable and responsive federal    government. Expected outcomes resulting from improved interoperability    include seamless information flow across jurisdictions, cost optimizations    through reuse, increased responsiveness and agility, and improved reporting. 


Migration    to GC Identity, Credential and Access Management (ICAM) Service 
          (TBS-CIOB,    SSC)
22
GC ICAM is a critical, foundational    element of the overall GC Enterprise Security Architecture (ESA) Program. GC    ICAM will provide a GC-wide solution that will decrease costs, enhance the    experience and efficiency of end-users, improve the overall security posture    of GC networks, systems and applications, and provide greater control of    privacy. GC ICAM will be implemented in a phased, incremental approach over a    number of years. 


Open government
          (TBS-CIOB) 
64, 75
Open government is about making government more    accessible to everyone. This means giving greater access to government data    and information to the Canadian public and the business community. 





Additional priorities moving forward



Priority (lead)
Strategic actions
Overview




Data centre consolidation 
          (SSC) 
4
SSC is in the process of establishing the GC’s future IT    infrastructure: a cost-effective and robust IT backbone that will support the    current and future needs of our partner departments. As we transform our    infrastructure, SSC and partner departments will need to work together to    migrate applications and workloads from the legacy environment to a new,    modern and consolidated environment.


Network    consolidation 
          (SSC) 
5
The GCNet WAN Services project will    consolidate and modernize wide-area network services for SSC and its partners    and clients to reduce costs, increase security, and enhance program delivery    to Canadian citizens and businesses. 


Email solution 
          (SSC) 
6
The Email Transformation Initiative will consolidate    and modernize email services to reduce costs, increase security and enhance    program delivery to Canadian citizens and businesses. 


Preparation    for Workplace Technology Device transformation
          (SSC) 
41
TBS-CIOB will establish, publish and    update a standard minimum software configuration for personal computers. The    minimum standard will be based on an X86-64 bit and will include a minimum    operating system configuration plus other software considered necessary for    productivity, remote management and cybersecurity. 


Adoption    of managed GC HR system
          (TBS-OCHRO    (Office of the Chief Human Resources Officer)) 
n/a
My GCHR (PeopleSoft) v9.1 has been designated as the    standard for the GC people management system. My GCHR will be the one-stop    solution for all HR administrative transactions. 


Adoption    of GCDOCS for document management 
          (TBS-CIOB) 
56
GCDOCS is the GC official electronics    document records management solution to support departments in their information management obligations for information life-cycle management. Within a    GCDOCS enterprise repository, departments can collect, store, share,    organize, manage and search content. GCDOCS enables document-centred    collaboration while offering robust access controls through user and group    administration rights. 


Shared    case management
          (TBS-CIOB) 
n/a
The goal of this initiative is to provide a common case-management    solution to departments across the GC. This is a key initiative aligned with    GC IT modernization strategies. 


Financial management    transformation
          (TBS-OCG (Office of the    Comptroller General))
67
Financial management transformation will    transform and modernize the financial management function to enable chief    financial officers and the financial management function to provide    higher-value services and advice to programs and decision makers, provide    timely and accurate financial and resource management information across the    GC, streamline financial services, and create an efficient and effective financial    management systems environment. 
          The objective is to become best in    class in terms of operational efficiency, business support effectiveness, and    ability to provide increased value to the business decision makers and    Canadians. 


Transformation    of Pay Administration (TPA) Initiative
          (PSPC)
n/a
The Pay Modernization Project replaced the government’s    outdated pay system with Phoenix, a modern, commercial off-the-shelf solution    that includes streamlined and modernized business processes. Phoenix provides    increased automation and self-service, and seamless integration with the GC’s    Human Resources Management System (GC HRMS, PeopleSoft). The  focus will be to ensure that public servants are paid accurately and promptly  for the highly valued work they do on behalf of Canadians and that the pay  system is stabilized and able to perform within service standards.




 Top of Page


Appendix B: implementation  roadmap


Service



Implementation    roadmap


Strategic    actions
Status
Involved
Target completion


Underway
Directional




Service    management


1. Develop IT service portfolios and catalogues
Yes
No
SSC, PSPC
2017


2. Report on key areas of IT system health    performance
Yes
No
SSC, PSPC
2017


3. Implement enterprise IT service management tools
No
Yes
SSC, departments
TBD


48. Develop digital policy
Yes
No
TBS
2018


49. Identify and prioritize SSC essential services
Yes
No
SSC, TBS
2018


50. Establish SSC asset inventory and baseline
Yes
No
SSC
2019


Cloud first


7. Adopt cloud services
Yes
No
SSC, departments
TBD


8. Establish a cloud service broker
Yes
No
SSC
TBD


9. Offer public cloud services
Yes
No
SSC
TBD


10. Offer private cloud services
Yes
No
SSC
TBD


Technology    modernization


4. Complete data centre consolidation and    modernization
Yes
No
SSC, departments
TBD


5. Complete telecom / network consolidation
Yes
No
SSC, departments
TBD


6. Reassess government email consolidation
Yes
No
SSC, departments
TBD


Information    and data sharing


51.  Determine the feasibility of developing a “tell us once” approach for  government
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


11. Build a platform for enterprise interoperability
Yes
No
TBS, PSPC, SSC
2019


52. Introduce a strategy for use of open source    software and open standards
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


12. Introduce a mobile application strategy and    framework
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


53. Develop an API strategy
Yes
No
TBS
2018


13. Introduce a government API store 
Yes
No
TBS
TBD


54. Enhance online infrastructure to enable    departments to release their data and information
Yes
No
TBS, Open Data Exchange
TBD


55. Develop master data management program
No
Yes
TBS, departments
TBD


15. Advance analytics
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, departments
TBD


14. Implement a platform for external collaboration
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, PSPC, departments
TBD


56. Implement GCDOCS
Yes
No
TBS, PSPC, departments
2022


57. Migrate websites to Canada.ca and assess options for a single GC digital  service platform
Yes
No
TBS, HC, CRA, IRCC, ECCC
TBD





Manage



Implementation    roadmap


Strategic    actions
Status
Involved
Target completion


Underway
Directional




Governance


27. Establish enterprise IM-IT governance 
Yes
No
TBS
2017


28. Develop methods to prioritize investments in    legacy and transformation initiatives
Yes
No
TBS, SSC
2017


29. Document roles and responsibilities for IT and    IT security
No
Yes
TBS
2017


58. Introduce stronger project oversight at the concept phase
No
Yes
TBS
2019


59. Establish data governance
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


Enterprise    architecture alignment and practices


30. Evolve IM-IT management practices, processes and    tools
Yes
No
TBS, departments
Ongoing


31. Develop enterprise architectures for business,    information, applications and technology
Yes
No
TBS, functional communities
Ongoing


32. Adopt agile approaches to implementing business    solutions
Yes
No
Departments
Ongoing


60. Standardize metadata
No
Yes
TBS, departments
TBD


61. Develop information and data valuation framework
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


62. Develop an information management performance    framework
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


Agility and    innovation


33. Lead innovation
No
Yes
Departments
TBD


34. Adopt modern and flexible business models 
No
Yes
SSC, PSPC
TBD


63. Provide tools and resources to make innovative    use of information and data
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


64. Shift culture and processes toward open by    design
No
Yes
TBS, departments
2021


65. Establish a Digital Advisory Board
Yes
No
TBS
2018


66. Establish digital government principles
Yes
No
TBS
2018


67. Advance financial management transformation
Yes
No
TBS, departments
TBD


Sustainability


35. Ensure IT infrastructure sustainability
No
Yes
TBS, SSC
2019


36. Rationalize investments
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, departments
TBD


68. Develop process to balance infrastructure supply    and demand
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, departments
2018





Security



Implementation    roadmap


Strategic    actions
Status
Involved
Target completion


Underway
Directional




Defence in    depth


16. Secure the government’s network perimeter
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, CSE
TBD


17. Implement end-point security profiles
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, CSE, departments
TBD


18. Implement an enterprise approach to    vulnerability and patch management 
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2019


19. Manage and control administrative privileges
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2019


Trusted    solutions and services


20. Protect web transactions to and from    external-facing websites
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2018


21. Implement an improved cyber-authentication    service
No
Yes
TBS, SSC
TBD


22. Implement a trusted digital identity for people    accessing internal government networks and systems
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2018


23. Implement a secure communication service for    classified information
No
Yes
TBS, CSE, SSC, departments
TBD


24. Implement enterprise data loss prevention
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, departments
TBD


Awareness and    understanding


25. Enable comprehensive understanding of end-point    devices
No
Yes
TBS, SSC, departments
TBD


26. Enhance awareness of enterprise cybersecurity    threat and risk environment
No
Yes
TBS, CSE, departments
TBD





Community



Implementation    roadmap


Strategic    actions
Status
Involved
Target completion


Underway
Directional




IM-IT    workforce


39. Enable career development
Yes
No
TBS, departments, CSPS
Ongoing


40. Improve diversity
Yes
No
TBS, departments
2017


69. Strengthen recruitment
No
Yes
TBS, departments
TBD


70. Modernize information and data management    profession
No
Yes
TBS
Ongoing


71. Develop information and data management training
No
Yes
TBS, CSPS
TBD


72. Strengthen leadership development
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


73. Lead targeted initiatives
No
Yes
TBS
TBD


Modern    workplace


41. Modernize workplace technology devices
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
Ongoing


42. Support a mobile workforce
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2020


43. Provide Wi-Fi access 
Yes
No
TBS, SSC, departments
2020


44. Provide desktop videoconferencing to employees
Yes
No
SSC, departments
2020


45. Implement managed print services
Yes
No
SSC, departments
Ongoing


74. Improve IM-IT accessibility
Yes
No
TBS, departments
TBD


Digital    collaboration


46. Promote digital literacy and collaboration
No
Yes
TBS, departments
TBD


47. Advance digital collaboration
Yes
No
TBS, departments
Ongoing


75. Expand open government training and outreach
Yes
No
TBS, CSPS
2018



 Top of Page


Appendix C: key performance indicators


Service



Strategic    actions
Key    performance indicators




Service    management


1. Develop IT service portfolios and catalogues
Published catalogues
          Client satisfaction with service targets
          Time lag to resolve a service target issue


2. Report on key areas of IT system health    performance
Client satisfaction


3. Implement enterprise IT service management tools
Number of departments and agencies using enterprise    ITSM tools


48. Develop digital policy
New policy is published and in effect
          Implementation milestones are identified


49. Identify and prioritize SSC essential services
Prioritized list of SSC essential services is    developed


50. Establish SSC asset inventory and baseline
SSC asset inventory and baseline are established


Cloud first


7. Adopt cloud services
Percentage of operational spending allocated to    cloud computing services


8. Establish a cloud service broker
Client satisfaction 


9. Offer public cloud services
Percentage of operational spending allocated to    public cloud computing services


10. Offer private cloud services
Percentage of operational spending allocated to    private cloud computing services


Technology    modernization


4. Complete data centre consolidation and    modernization
Number of data centres


5. Complete telecom / network consolidation
Number of departmental wide-area networks


6. Complete government email consolidation
Number of departmental email systems


Information    and data sharing


51. Determine  the feasibility of developing a “tell us once” approach for government
Feasibility  assessment is completed


11. Build a platform for enterprise interoperability
Number of departments / departmental systems    connected to the interoperability platform


52. Introduce a strategy for use of open source    software and open standards
Strategy for use of open source software and open    standards is developed


12. Introduce a mobile application strategy and    framework
Mobile application strategy and framework are    developed


53. Develop an API strategy
API strategy is developed


13. Introduce a government API store 
Client satisfaction


54. Enhance online infrastructure to enable    departments to release their data and information
Number of examples of use of government data and    information to support innovation or economic growth


55. Develop master data management program
Program is defined


15. Advance analytics
Enterprise analytics platform requirements are    developed


14. Implement a platform for external collaboration
Client satisfaction


56. Implement GCDOCS
Number of departments onboarded


57. Migrate websites to Canada.ca and  assess options for a single GC digital service platform
Percentage of content migrated for 4 target    organizations
          A strategy to set future direction is developed





Manage



Strategic    actions
Key    performance indicators




Governance


27. Establish enterprise IM-IT governance 
Percentage of departments adopting enterprise    solutions


28. Develop methods to prioritize investments in    legacy and transformation initiatives
Documented methodology
          Number of IT and IT-enabled projects approved by    CEPP


29. Document roles and responsibilities for IT and    IT security
Employee awareness of roles and responsibilities
          Number of employees trained in IT and IT security    awareness


58. Introduce stronger project oversight at the concept phase
Oversight at the concept phase is established


59. Establish data governance
Governance principles are defined


Enterprise    architecture alignment and practices


30. Evolve IM-IT management practices, processes and    tools
Percentage of variance between budgets, forecasts    and actual costs


31. Develop enterprise architectures for business,    information, applications and technology
Percentage of IT budget assigned to enterprise    architecture development and maintenance (concept cases in the 2018 to 2019    fiscal year)


32. Adopt agile approaches to implementing business    solutions
Number of multi-departmental contracts being used


60. Standardize metadata
Metadata registry is developed


61. Develop information and data valuation framework
Pilot is complete and lessons learned documented    toward broader adoption


62. Develop an information management performance    framework
An information management performance framework is    developed


Agility and    innovation


33. Lead innovation
Number of projects underway in partnership with    innovation hubs


34. Adopt modern and flexible business models 
Cost-recovery business models adopted
          Number of departmental IT plans with full costing    (including SSC component)


63. Provide tools and resources to make innovative    use of information and data
A sandbox for developing and testing innovative use    of information and data is available to departments and partners


64. Shift culture and processes toward open by design
Number of government-wide open government    initiatives being implemented
          Percentage of Government of Canada processes that    are open by default


65. Establish a Digital Advisory Board
A Digital Advisory Board is established


66. Establish digital government principles
Digital government principles are established


67. Advance financial management transformation
Policy instruments in support of GC financial    management are developed


Sustainability


35. Ensure IT infrastructure sustainability
Sustainable funding model in place


36. Rationalize investments
Number of at-risk applications retired
          Application evergreen plans in place
          Number of projects aimed at implementing common    enterprise solutions


68. Develop process to balance infrastructure supply    and demand
A framework allowing departments to access alternate service options    is developed





Security



Strategic    actions
Key    performance indicators




Defence in    depth


16. Secure the government’s network perimeter
Percentage of departments and agencies migrated to    SSC-managed gateways
          Percentage of external partners using GC trusted    interconnection points


17. Implement end-point security profiles
Percent increase in devices using end-point security    profiles
          Number of incidents related to devices using    end-point security profiles


18. Implement an enterprise approach to    vulnerability and patch management 
Percentage of GC IT systems with critical    vulnerabilities


19. Manage and control administrative privileges
Number of inactive or unauthorized privileged    accounts
          Percentage of privileged accounts configured for    strong authentication


Trusted    solutions and services


20. Protect web transactions to and from    external-facing websites
Percentage of external-facing websites and services    that are accessible only through a secure connection ("HTTPS only")
        Percentage of internal websites and services that    are accessible through a secure connection ("HTTPS only")


21. Implement an improved cyber-authentication    service
Contract awarded for evolved cyber-authentication    solution
          Number of new services signed on to enterprise    cyber-authentication service
          Client satisfaction


22. Implement a trusted digital identity for people    accessing internal government networks and systems
Percentage of GC workers with GCPass accounts
          Percent increase in GCPass authentication    transactions


23. Implement a secure communication service for    classified information
Percentage of users (within departments that have    implemented this service) that have access to the service
          Number of departments and agencies using the common    enterprise-wide secret network service
          Reduction in number of discrete departmental secret    networks


24. Implement enterprise data loss prevention
Reduced number of incidents (involving unauthorized    disclosures of sensitive data, accidental or intentional)


Awareness and    understanding


25. Enable comprehensive understanding of end-point    devices
Average incident resolution time (decreased)
          Percent of end-point devices covered by the service


26. Enhance awareness of enterprise cybersecurity    threat and risk environment
Percentage of information systems monitored and tracked    within the service





Community



Strategic    actions
Key    performance indicators




IM-IT    workforce


39. Enable career development
Percentage of core public administration CSs with    learning plans
            Number of departments using IT community generics    (CIO suite)


40. Improve diversity
Number of women occupying positions in the CS    occupational group (comparison over time)
            Percentage of departments that have a strategy to    promote gender parity


69. Strengthen recruitment
Recruitment campaign is developed
            Number of outreach activities to post-secondary    institutions
            Number of onboarding tools and initiatives developed    to improve integration of new recruits
            Partially assessed CS inventory is developed


70. Modernize information and data management    profession
Generic job descriptions, competency profiles, and    organizational structures for information and data management professionals    are developed, used GC-wide, and maintained evergreen


71. Develop information and data management training
Learning and training opportunities for information    and data professionals are developed, tested, made available, and assessed    for relevancy to support the business, and maintained evergreen


72. Strengthen leadership development
Number of CS employees with a talent management plan
            Number of departments with a succession plan
            System for tracking IM-IT leadership across the    enterprise is developed


73. Lead targeted initiatives
Number of resourcing actions completed through the    talent cloud


Modern    workplace


41. Modernize workplace technology devices
Enterprise standards and processes for life-cycle    management are established
            Compliance with standards


42. Support a mobile workforce
A mobility strategy for the GC is developed
            Percentage of public service employees with mobile    work devices


43. Provide Wi-Fi access 
Percentage of public service employees with access    to Wi-Fi 
            Number of wireless access points (WAPs) installed


44. Provide desktop videoconferencing to employees
Number of usage minutes by end-point


45. Implement managed print services
Number of departments at 8:1 average ratio of office    employees to printing units


74. Improve IM-IT accessibility
Number of targeted initiatives underway


Digital    collaboration


46. Promote digital literacy and collaboration
Number of GCTools Ambassadors by department
            Number of GCTools information sessions offered and    the number of participants per session
            Data literacy engagement and awareness initiatives    are underway


47. Advance digital collaboration
Percentage of public servants registered on GCTools


75. Expand open government training and outreach
Number of employees participating in open government    learning opportunities
            Percentage of departments or agencies sending    employees to open government learning opportunities



 Top of Page


Appendix D: roles and  responsibilities
The Government of Canada is made up of over 100 organizations that deliver  a broad range of programs and services to individuals and businesses in Canada  and abroad. Its programs and services are categorized into 4 spending  areas: 

economic affairs
social affairs
international affairs
government affairs 

IM-IT supports the government in delivering  these external-facing programs and services.
The Secretary of the Treasury Board sets government-wide strategic direction  for IM-IT, with input from departments’ deputy heads, CIOs, information  management senior officials and other stakeholders. The responsibility for  delivering IM-IT services is shared between government departments and central  service providers such as Shared Services Canada and Public Services and  Procurement Canada.
Shared  Services Canada (SSC) has the mandate to provide  data centres, networks and email services to the largest government  departments. Smaller government departments receive these services on an  optional basis. SSC, Communications Security Establishment Canada, and Public  Safety Canada have a shared responsibility for cybersecurity, with oversight  provided by TBS. In addition, SSC is responsible for procuring hardware and  software, including security software for workplace technology devices (the  authorized physical devices and related software used in government office work).  Departments are responsible for workplace technology device deployment, support  and asset life-cycle management. SSC spends $2 billion annually on the services  it provides, portions of which it cost-recovers from federal departments.
Public  Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC) provides  IM-IT services supporting back office services such as:

human resource management  systems
pay and pension
enterprise records and document  management
financial systems and services

SSC and PSPC jointly support federal departments  in procuring IM-IT goods and services.
The Treasury  Board of Canada Secretariat, supported by the Chief Information Officer  Branch, develops strategy and sets government-wide policy and mandatory  requirements for IM, IT and cybersecurity, and provides guidance on  implementing the direction through policy implementation notices.
 Top of Page


Appendix E: definitions

information management 
A discipline that directs and supports effective and efficient  management of information in an organization, from planning and systems  development to disposal or long-term preservation. Source: Policy Framework for Information and Technology



information technology
Includes any equipment or system that is used in the automatic  acquisition, storage, manipulation, management, movement, control, display,  switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or information. It  includes all matters concerned with the design, development, installation and  implementation of information systems and applications to meet business  requirements. Source: Policy Framework for Information and Technology


 Top of Page


Appendix F: draft digital principles

Understand users and their  needsStart with user needs and build for them, and  with them. Conduct ongoing testing with users. Do the hard work so that they  don’t have to.
Iterate and improve frequentlyDevelop in an agile manner using alpha, beta and  live phases. Test end-to-end and continuously improve in response to user  feedback. Test early and often.
Build the right teamCreate and empower  multidisciplinary teams, linking policy with delivery.
Build a service-oriented  cultureLead and implement  a team and departmental culture focussed on users.
Work in the openShare and  collaborate in the open, plan to make data open from the start.
Integrate proportionate security and privacy from the outsetConsider business context. Manage risks.
Build in an open and  interoperable wayGive equal consideration for open source. Use  open standards. Build in an interoperable and reusable way.
Use the right tools for the jobUse common  government solutions and platforms. Build cloud first.
Design and deliver transparent  and ethical servicesBe open and  transparent in the use of automated systems and comply with ethical guidelines.
Be inclusive and provide  support for those who need itBuild in  inclusiveness, official languages and accessibility by design.
Know your dataManage data in  line with standards. Implement analytical tools and use the data you collect.
Be accountable to Canadians
        Define user-centred performance metrics. Publish real time data.
Develop open and innovative  partnershipsRecognize that an organization can't have all the best ideas. Create partnerships and collaborate.
Spend money wisely
        Enter into  sensible contracts and comply with procurement standards.

 Top of Page



Footnotes

Footnote 1

Throughout this document, the term "departments" is used to denote GC departments, agencies and other federal organizations.
 Return to footnote 1 referrer 





© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the President of the Treasury Board, 2017,ISBN: 978-0-660-24007-7




Page details

Date modified:
2020-07-27












About this site



Government of Canada

All contacts
Departments and agencies
About government

Themes and topics

Jobs
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finance
Science and innovation
Indigenous peoples
Veterans and military
Youth







Government of Canada Corporate

Social media
Mobile applications
About Canada.ca
Terms and conditions
Privacy

















