  GE.22 -05881(E)   Human Rights Council   Fiftieth session   13 June–8 July 2022   Agenda items 2 and 3   Annual report of the United Nations High Commissioner   for Human Rights and reports of the Office of the   High Commissioner and the Secretary -General   Promotion and protection of all human rights, civil,   political, economic, social and cultural rights,   including the right to development     The practi cal application of the Guiding Principles on   Business and Human Rights to the activities of technology   companies     Report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for  Human Rights    Summary    The present report is submitted pursuant to  resolution 47/23 of the Human Rights  Council , in which the Council  requested the  Office of the United Nations High  Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to prepare a report on the practical application  of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights  to the activities of technology  companies, and to present it to the Council at its fiftieth session. The report has been informed  by deliberations from a two -day expert consultation, also mandated by resolution 47/23, as  well as by submissions received fr om States and other stakeholders, and other relevant  processes and initiatives, in particular the OHCHR B -Tech Project.    The report is complemented by an addendum,1 which provides details of the expert  consultation held on 7 and 8 March 2022.            1 A/HRC/50/56/Add.1 .   United Nations  A/HRC/50/56    General Assembly  Distr.: General   21 April 2022     Original: English   
A/HRC/50/56   2   I. Introduction   1. In its resolution 47/23 on new and emerging digital technologies and human rights,  the Human Rights Council reaffirmed the importance of a holistic, inclusive and  comprehensive approach and the need for all stakeholders to collaborate in a more concerted  way in addressing the possible impacts, opportunities and challenges of new and emerging  digital technologies with regard to the promotion and protection of human rights. It requested  the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to  convene an expert consultation to discuss the practical application of the Guiding Principles  on Business and Human Rights2 to the activities of technology companies and to submit a  report to the Council at its fiftieth session. The Council further requested OHCHR to seek  input from and to take into account the relevant work already done by stakeholders from  diverse geographic regions.   2. In accordance with the latter request, a  call for submission s was sent out on 22  December 2021 to  all States and other stakeholders mentioned in resolution  47/23 , and 3 7  submissions were received .3  3. Furthermore, pursuant to the same resolution, OHCHR convened a two -day expert  consultation on 7 and 8 March 2022 .4 The consultation explored the norma tive content, as  well as the practical experiences, opportunities and challenges  faced,  in applying the Guiding  Principles to the technology sector. A detailed account of the deliberations from the  consultation is included in an addendum to the present rep ort.5  4. The aim of the present report is to demonstrate the value and practical application of  the Guiding Principles in preventing and addressing adverse impacts on human rights related  to tech nology  companies. The report draws on, and is informed by, the OHCHR B -Tech  Project ,6 deliberations during the consultation and stakeholder submissions.    II. Application of the Guiding Principles on Business and  Human Rights to the technology sector    A. Backgro und  5. In recent years there has been an increasing focus on the interrelationship between  human rights and technology. It has been well documented that new digital technologies ,  such as social media, cloud computing, Internet -of-things devices and artific ial intelligence  systems can contribute to positive social, economic and development effects, and that overall  advances in digital technologies contribute to the realization of the Sustainable Development  Goals. However, the use of these same technologies by companies, State agencies, consumers  and the wider public can also have negative impacts on people ’s lives, sometimes in severe  and irreparable ways. Leaks of personal information, dissemination of hate speech, the  undermining of democratic processes an d “algorithmic discrimination ” – to name but a few  of the documented risks – can all negatively affect the ability of people to enjoy their human  rights .7  6. A wealth of new initiatives, including standards, analys es and recommendations  emerging from the United Nations human rights mechanisms, have highlighted that the      2 Endorsed by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 17/4 of 16 June 2011.    3 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/events/consultations/2022/ohchr -consultation -and-call-submission practical -application -united .   4 See the concept note for the consultation, available at https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 03/UNGPs -tech-consultation -CN-7_8_March_2022.pdf .   5 A/HRC/50/56/Add.1 .   6 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/business/b -tech-project .   7 See https://papers.ssrn.co m/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3768813 . 
A/HRC/50/56    3 promise of digital technologies for transformational change for the benefit of humanity can  only be reali zed when effectively guarding against the risk of harm to people .8  7. While some imp ortant efforts have been made, Government responses to the  challenges posed by digital technologies have tended to be reactive and ad hoc , at times  overlooking existing corporate responsibility and accountability frameworks and standards  that can provide p rincipled and rights -based responses. Some technology companies and  investors are engaged, and actively calling for more clarity and guidance, while much of the  sector has not engaged on the human rights risks arising from their activities.   8. The Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights  are the authoritative global  standard for preventing and addressing human rights harms connected to business activity,  including in the tech nology  sector. Their authority and legitimacy stems from having been  unanimo usly endorsed by the Human Rights Council in 2011, with the express support of a  diverse set of stakeholders , including from the private sector.   9. The Guiding Principles set out the distinct but complementary role of States and  companies  in prevent ing and address ing human rights harms associated with business  activity. They are comprised of three separate but mutually reinforcing pillars:    (a) Pillar I . The State duty to protect against human rights abuses by third parties,  including business es, through appropriate policies, regulation and adjudication;    (b) Pillar II . The corporate responsibility to respect human rights, by not  infringing on the rights of others , and to address adverse impacts on human rights related to  their activities ;    (c) Pillar III . Access to remedy for victims of corporate -related human rights  abuse through judicial or non -judicial mechanisms.   10. For States and companies seeking to effectively manage risks to people connected to  the digital economy , the Guiding Principl es offer a principled and pragmatic framework that  can be applied globally and allows the positive impact and opportunities of technological  innovation to flourish in a rights -respecting ecosystem .9 Echoing this, the Working Group on  the issue of human ri ghts and transnational corporations and other business enterprises   (Working Group on b usiness and human rights ),10 taking stock of the first decade of the  implementation of the Guiding Principles, stressed that the y provide d a compelling starting  point for  companies and States seeking to address the potential harms of digital technologies  by effectively managing associated risks to people, as they precisely sought to manage the  gap between rapid change and the capacity of society to manage its consequences.11  11. There have been repeated calls for greater guidance on and uptake of the Guiding  Principles in relation to the technology sector. In 2020, the High -level Panel on Digital  Cooperation identified a critical need for clearer guidance about what should be expected  from private companies with regard to human rights as they develop ed and deploy ed digital  technologies .12 In “the highest aspiration : a call to action for human rights”, the Secretary General called on the international community to work with business to apply the Guiding  Principles, and specifically with social media companies to understand and respond to  concerns about existing or potential human rights violations, incl uding by working with civil  society and human rights defenders to prevent or quickly redress such violations.   12. Against this backdrop, OHCHR launched the B -Tech Project with a view to advanc ing  the uptake of the Guiding Principles by both States and tech nology companies. Using the  lens of the Guiding Principles, the B -Tech Project seeks to provide normative clarity and  practical guidance on the respective roles and responsibilities of States and technology      8 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Human -Rights -Council -Advisory Committee.pdf .   9 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/introduction -ungp age-technology.pdf .   10 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/special -procedures/wg -business .   11 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2021 -12/ungps10plusroadmap.pdf .   12 See https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation -report -for%20web.pdf . 
A/HRC/50/56   4  companies to ensure respect for human rights in t he development, deployment and use of  digital technologies. A series of B -Tech foundational papers on all the three pillars of the  Guiding Principles as applied to the technology sector ha ve been issued , which inform much  of the substance of the present re port. All B -Tech Project activities and engagements are  undertaken in close collaboration with States, technology companies, civil society, academia,  national human rights institutions and other key actors to ensure that the outputs and guidance  respond to  the concerns and practical realities of companies and stakeholders. The project  also facilitates a company community of practice to advance respect for human rights in the  technology industry  and enable mutual learning of the Guiding Principles .13   B. State duty to protect (pillar I)   13. While t he aim of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights is to close the  protection gap in relation to the impact of businesses on human rights, they recognize that  the State remains the primary duty bearer un der international law to protect human rights.  Pillar I of the Guiding Principles, the framework for State action, is anchored in States ’  existing human rights obligations . In accordance with the Guiding Principles, States must  protect against human rights  abuses by business. This requires taking appropriate measures  to prevent, investigate, punish and redress human rights abuses involving business, including  technology companies .14  14. While recognizing the variety of political systems across jurisdictions and the  heterogeneous nature of the sector, alignment with the Guiding Principles in national or  multilateral responses to human rights risks related to the technology sector is key. I nstead  of a proliferation of new and fragmented standards of conduct, alignment of technology  company practices with the Guiding Principles can provide predictability for companies and,  most importantly, for at-risk stakeholders. At the same time, it creat es a fair, level  playing  field for technology companies to innovate and compete based on rights -respecting conduct.    1. General State regulatory and policy functions   15. As part of their regulatory and policy functions, States are called on to adopt a “smart  mix” of voluntary and mandatory measures to require  companies, including in the technology  sector, to respect human rights ( guiding principle 3).   16. The smart mix entails enforcing laws that are aimed at, or have the effect of, requiring  technology com panies to respect human rights, and periodically assess the adequacy of such  laws and address any gaps. An increasing number of States have enacted or are considering  legislation15 that will effect ively  requir e companies in all sectors to communicate about  the  presence and effects of human rights due diligence policies and systems. In parallel, many  States are elaborating policy frameworks at the national and multilateral level s regarding the  development and use of digital technologies , such as those based on data protection and  artificial intelligence. These developments, in particular proposals related to mandatory  human rights due diligence requirements for companies, will have implications for how  technology companies design, develop and sell products an d services, for example by  mandating greater transparency about the human rights impacts and mitigation  measures  put  in place.   17. As part of the smart mix, some States have been providing incentives for technology  companies by making access to export cred it conditional, in part, on conducting human rights  due diligence. The smart mix can also include providing guidance to business, including on  how to address risks to human rights related to the sale of high -risk products in conflict affected and high -risk areas ( guiding principle 7). An example is the human rights due  diligence guidance16 issued by the Department of State of the United States of America to      13 See OHCHR B -Tech Proj ect, “Reflections on the Status of Business Respect for Human Rights in the  Technology Sector ”, company community of practice note.    14 See OHCHR B -Tech, “UN Guiding Principles in the Age of Technology ”.   15 See https://c yrilla.org/ .   16 See https://www.state.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/09/DRL -Industry -Guidance -Project -FINAL 508.pdf . 
A/HRC/50/56    5 assist companies in prevent ing their products or services with surveillance capabilities from  being m isused by foreign government end -users to commit human rights violations.17  18. In the Guiding Principles , States are also call ed upon to encourage, and where  appropriate require, business enterprises to communicate how they address adverse impacts  on huma n rights stemming from or linked to their business ( guiding principle 3). This also  applies to digital technology business practices, products and services. Meaningful reporting  and transparency standards introduced by Governments can enhance the understan ding of  risks to people related to digital technologies and provide better evidence to compare  corporate actions to address such risks.18 Of particular importance in this regard is  transparency regarding human rights due diligence processes, focusing on ongoing  assessment and action, as well as the engagement  of and communication with potentially  affected groups and other relevant stakeholde rs.   2. The State -business nexus   19. The State duty to protect also applies to a State’s own actions as an economic actor  (guiding principle 4). State obligations and business responsibilities are complex in situations  in which States contract with, partne r with, license from, or support technology companies.  In such situations, in accordance with the Guiding Principles , it is recommended that States  take additional steps to protect against human right abuse, including , where appropriate , by  requiring human  rights due diligence when financing, supporting or owning  a business or  when outsourcing or contracting in relation to public services or procuring goods and  services.   20. When State actors involv e technology companies in the provision of public services  and goods, they need to exercise adequate oversight to ensure that th ose companies respect  human rights and that cooperation with those companies does not adversely impact the  enjoyment of human rights ( guiding principle 5), such as when algorithmic decisi on-making  is used to manage public infrastructure in the context of smart cities. Additional steps may  be required to protect against human rights abuses by technology enterprises that are owned  or controlled by the State or receive substantial support fro m State agencies. Additional steps  may also be necessary to ensure human rights compliance when the State procur es digital  technologies from private sector entities. In such business relationships, the State holds  significant leverage to incentivize techno logy companies to ensure respect for human rights  (guiding principle 6). For example, as digital technologies are used in public health  governance , States can use the potential of public procurement as a tool to scale up  commitment and implementation of bu siness respect for human rights, for example, push ing  for privacy -friendly public health apps.19 This has been a topic of debate in relation to State  demands on technology companies for access to data and functionality in the context of track and-trace apps developed to address the coronavirus disease ( COVID -19) pandemic.    3. Ensuring policy coherence   21. While taking action to uphold the duty to protect human rights, the Guiding Principles  stipulate that States should ensure policy coherence ( guiding principle 8).   22. In the context of digital technologies, this means ensuring coordination on matters  related to the adverse impacts of digital technologies across government departments,  agencies and State-based institutions, on both the national and subnational level s, and when  States participate in multilateral institutions and enter into trade and investment agreements.  National human rights institutions can function as key partners to enhance State capacity and  expertise  in this area .20      17 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/UnitedStates.pdf .   18 See OHCHR B -Tech Foundational Paper , “The UN Guiding Principles  in the Age of Technology ”.   19 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/write up_IGF_panel.pdf .   20 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/RepublicofKorea.pdf ;  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/ 2022 -03/NHRI_B_Tech_consultation.pdf ; and   
A/HRC/50/56   6  23. Due to the scale and cross -border reach of the digital ecosystem and its products and  services, it will often be necessary to involve a broad range of States to achieve efficacy in  addressing human rights risks associated with digital technologies.   24. There is a  strong need for collaboration and alignment at the regional and global level s  to avoid fragmented regulatory and policy approaches. In light of this, the Guiding Principles  reinforce the fundamental importance of multilateral and multi -stakeholder approac hes to  protect against, prevent and remediate human rights impacts associated with business. An  example of a multilateral approach includes the Freedom Online Coalition , a government  alliance aiming to achieve a multilateral consensus on Internet freedoms.21 The Coalition   seeks to promote the development of norms regarding the practical application of the State  duty to protect to digital technologies.    4. Stakeholder reflections on the State duty to protect in the technology sector   25. While the increasing attention of policy makers  and lawmakers to the adverse impacts  of digital technologies on human rights have been welcomed, stakeholders have voiced  concerns about how this issue is being approached. Concerns include allegations that some  regulatory attempt s intended to address adverse impacts on users of digital products and  services might instead make it more difficult for intermediaries to respect the rights of their  users, because of broad and vague definitions and scope; excessive penalties, including  significant liability for company personnel; and requirements to remove content under strict  timelines or by means of automated tools without attention to necessary safeguards.22  26. The State -business  nexus has increasingly come to the attention of various  stakeholder  groups, raising concerns of a lack of human rights protection when States have outsourced  to, or contracted tech nology  companies for , public services.23 For example, for the delivery  of social services, public authorities are reportedly increa singly relying on technological  systems developed by private actors.24 Another area of concern is the use, development,  production, sale and export of surveillance and facial recognition technology for  identification purposes by both State agencies and private  sector actors.25  27. In order to provide enhanced clarity for those working on regulatory proposals  regarding business conduct in the technology sector, the B -Tech Project is developing a  guidance tool aimed at allowing policy makers and other key stakeholders to assess whether  regulatory or incentive -based initiatives di rected at technology company conduct align with  the Guiding Principles. The purpose of the guidance tool will be to inform the choice of  design and policy options  or instruments for draft legislation and incentive -based initiatives  aiming at ensuring that technology  companies  respect human rights.26   C. Corporate responsibility to respect human rights  (pillar II)   28. The Guiding Principles set out a principled approach for all companies to prevent,  mitigate and address human rights harms to people from busi ness activities.27 For technology     https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/b -tech-blog-policy coherence -nhris -tech.pdf .   21 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Freedom -Online -Coalition.pdf .   22 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Global -Network -Initiative.pdf .   23 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Internat ional -Organization -of-Employers.pdf .   24 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/AlgorithmWatch.pdf  and  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/CIPESA.pdf .   25 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/PrivacyInternational.pd f and  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Amnesty -International.pdf .   26 See also https://www.geneva -academy.ch/news/detail/426 -bridging -governance -gaps-in-the-age-oftechnology -a-discussion -on-the-state-duty-to-protect ; https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 02/CDT -B-Tech -CDT -GA-UNGPs -DSA -Consultation -14-Sept.docx ;  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -02/B -Tech_BHR_Forum_Building_Blocks.pdf ; and  https://www.geneva -academy.ch/news/detail/517 -placing -human -rights -at-the-centre -of-new-techregulations .   27 See also https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/key characteristics -business -respect.pdf .  
A/HRC/50/56    7 companies, this includes that they must anticipate and address harms related to the use of  their products and services, commonly referred to as the “end-use”. This corporate  responsibility applies to all international ly recognized human rights  (guiding principle 12,  commentary) .  29. The responsibility to respect human rights requires business enterprises to make a  policy commitment to respect human rights , carry out human rights due diligence and provide  remediation or coop erate in remediation of abuse where the company identifies adverse  impacts that it has caused or to which it has contributed.   30. The quality of a company ’s human rights due diligence and engagement with remedy  will increase when these practices are suppor ted by governance arrangements and leadership  actions to ensure that a company ’s policy commitment to respect human rights is embedded  from the top of the business enterprise through all its functions, which otherwise may act  without awareness or regard fo r human rights (guiding principle 16, commentary ). Human  rights “leads” in technology  companies have a central role to play in embedding human rights  considerations across processes and functions, stewarding ongoing engagement with civil  society and other stakeholders, and informing the senior leadership ’s decision -making. Buy in and support from the founders, executives and company governance bodies is critical to  ensure meaningful human rights due diligence and advanc e corporate respect for human  rights .28   1. Policy commitment   31. A key element of the corporate responsibility to respect human rights is that  companies express their commitment to meet this responsibility through a publicly available  statement of policy  (guiding principle 16).  This statement of policy should: be approved by  the most senior level of the business enterprise; be informed by relevant internal and/or  external expertise; stipulate the enterprise ’s human rights expectations of personnel, business   partners and other parties directly linked to its operations, products or services; be  communicated internally and externally to all personnel, business partners and other relevant  parties; and be internalized in the necessary operational policies and pro cedures throughout  the business enterprise  (guiding principle 16).  A growing number of tech nology  companies  are publishing human rights policy commitments making explicit reference to the Guiding  Principles .29   2. Human rights due diligence for the design,  development and use of technology  products and services   32. The requirement for companies to undertake human rights due diligence across their  activities and business relationships to identify, prevent, mitigate and account for how they  address the actual and potential human rights harms connected to their business  activities is  a central element of their corporate responsibility ( guiding principle  17).30 The human rights  due diligence requirement extends to a company ’s products and services. This is highly  relevant when considering the impacts of digital technologi es, as it is mostly in their use that  human rights harms will manifest. For example, customers might misuse a product to commit  human rights abuses ( for example , an employer using social networking tools to monitor  and  intimidate employees or a State using  technology for extrajudicial surveillance).   33. Human rights due diligence  needs to occur  early throughout the product design,  development and use phases and must be an ongoing exercise . Because human rights  situations are dynamic, the Guiding Principles stipulate that assessments of human rights  impacts should be undertaken at regular intervals: prior to a new activity or relationship; prior  to major decisions or changes in the operation; in response to or anticipation of changes in      28 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2021 -11/reflections -status -business -respect.pdf . See also  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -02/b-tech-leadership -dialogue.pdf  and  https://www.ohchr.org/sites/de fault/files/2021 -11/strategic -aspects -part-I.pdf .   29 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2021 -11/reflections -status -business -respect.pdf .   30 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/identifying -human rights -risks.pdf . 
A/HRC/50/56   8  the operating environm ent; and periodically throughout the life of an activity or relationship  (guiding principle 18).   34. Human rights due diligence  is an ongoing four -step process anchored in strong  internal and external stakeholder engagement. Companies need first to identif y and assess  impacts to gauge the nature and extent of human rights risks (step 1). On that basis, they must  act to prevent and mitigate risks to people, including by integrati ng human rights due  diligence within internal functions and process es (step 2). They then need to track the  effectiveness of risk mitigation responses over time (step 3) and to appropriately  communicate regarding their performance with respect to addressing human rights impact s  (step 4).31  35. When undertaking human rights due diligence, companies should pay special  attention to any particular human rights impacts on individuals from groups or population s  that may be at heightened risk of vulnerability or marginalization, such as children, ethnic  minorities, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community and  human rights defenders, and to keep in mind gender -based risks and impacts .32   36. Human rights due diligence  should cover any impacts a technology company may  cause, those that it may contribut e to through its own activities and those that may be directly  linked to its operations, products or services through its business relationships , even if it has  not contributed to those impacts. A technology company ’s “own activities ” in this context  inclu des the design, development, marketing, sale  or licensing and deployment of products,  services and solutions.   37. Human rights due diligence  should be done with reference to all internationally  recognized human rights ( guiding principle 12, commentary ). Fo r many in the technology  sector, questions will arise about the company ’s impacts on privacy and freedom of  expression. However, there is already evidence that the use and misuse of technologies can  have online and offline impacts on a wide range of other human rights. For example, the use  of artificial intelligence  tools by law enforcement and the criminal justice system could have  an impact on an individual ’s right to be free from arbitrary arrest or to equality before the  law; surveillance technologies c ould impact on the right to peaceful assembly; the use of  social media platforms could impact the right to mental health; and property rental platforms  could alter housing markets, possibly impacting the right to an adequate standard of living.   38. With re gard to communicating their human rights performance (step 4), some  technology  companies are increasingly issuing transparency reports ,33 providing insights, for  example , about government requests for user data and removal of content, among other types  of statistics and information, and disclosing their policies on enforcing their terms of service.  Some tech nology  companies are also publishing their human rights impact assessments of  particular products or services .34  39. Comprehensive and meaningful engage ment with external stakeholders forms a  central part of the human rights due diligence process. Engaging and communicating  meaningfully with stakeholders need to be part of the full cycle of human rights due diligence ,  at each step. This can be especially important if a company lacks internal diversity or existing  mechanisms to engage affected groups  (guiding principle 18, commentary ).  40. Human rights due diligence  can often involve technology companies having to  navigate situations of competing rights or policy objectives. Actions taken to prevent and  mitigate adverse human rights impacts should not result in other human right harms and ,  when this is not possible, companies should draw on the considerable experience of the  international human rights community in dealing with situations of competing rights .35      31 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2021 -11/reflections -status -business -respect.pdf .   32 See A/HRC/41/43 . See also https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Women -at-theTable.pdf .   33 See https://www.accessnow.org/transparency -reporting -index/ .   34 See, e.g., https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Meta .pdf.   35 See, for example , the Rabat Plan for Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or  religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence . 
A/HRC/50/56    9  3. Delivering or enabling remedy for human rights harms   41. In accordance with  the Guiding Principles, i f harm has occurred in connect ion with  a  business’s activities, products or services,  the company is  expect ed to engage in remedial  action, either through its own remediation mechanism or by participating in one ( guiding  principle 22). When companies have in p lace credible and effective mechanisms for  stakeholders to raise grievances, this can enhance the robustness of a company ’s efforts to  identify and assess human rights impacts  (see sect. II.D below).36   4. Stakeholder reflections on the corporate responsib ility to respect human rights   42. Civil society and other stakeholders, including tech nology  companies themselves,  refer red to a number of continuing challenges and gaps in the implementation of the corporate  responsibility to respect human rights in the t echnology sector. For example, current practices  with regard to stakeholder engagement in the context of human rights due diligence are often  found to be unsatisfactory for a number of reasons , including  that high demands and repeated  requests from compani es for input from a small number of civil society organizations create  engagement fatigue and resource strain on certain groups. A lack of access to affected  stakeholders , especially in the global South, where many technology companies tend to lack  a direc t relationship with groups that may be most at  risk, is another challenge .37 While some  technology  companies have started to publish transparency reports, others, such as  surveillance companies, are moving towards less transparency .38 It is due to that mix ed level  of company performance with regard to transparency reporting and communications that  experts have repeatedly called for standardization of transparency reporting .39 Overall, the  submissions indicated a lack of detailed public information at presen t about the way that  technology  companies conducted  due diligence, making it difficult to assess the effectiveness  of their due diligence processes .40  43. In view of the present challenges, p ublicly available rankings , such as the index by  Ranking Digital Rights , which aim to assess the performance of technology companies on  digital rights aspects , provide a very useful compass to measure progress, including on  corporate governance of human rights.    D. Access to remedy  (pillar III)   44. The right to an effective remedy for human rights violations is a central tenet of human  rights law and is reflected in pillar III of the Guiding Principles , which  focuse s on access to  remedy for v ictims of business -related human rights ha rms (guiding principles 25 –31).41 This  includes harms that may arise from the way technology products and services are developed,  implemented and used. States are required to take “appropriate steps to prevent, investigate,  punish and redress ” business -related human rights abuses within th eir territory and/or  jurisdiction  (guiding principle 1)  and ensure that those affected “have access to effective  remedy” (guiding principle 25) .  45. Pillar III refers to three categories of grievance mechanisms: judicial mechanisms ,  State -based non -judicia l mechanisms and non-State -based grievance mechanisms.42      36 See also A/HRC/50/45/Add.1  (forthcoming) .   37 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2021 -11/strategic -aspects -part-II.pdf .   38 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Amnesty -Intern ational.pdf#page=6 .   39 See https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0007650317717957 .   40 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/GlobalPartnersDigital -joint-submission -onbehalf -of-a-groupoforganizations.pdf#page=5 .   41 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/access -to-remedy concepts -and-principles.pdf .   42  The B -Tech Project has collabora ted closely with the OHCHR Accountability and Remedy  Project.  See in particular https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 03/A2R_in_tech_consultation _report.pdf . 
A/HRC/50/56   10   1. The responsiveness of judicial mechanisms to cases of human rights harms arising  from the use of technologies   46. The Guiding Principles make clear that effective judicial mechanisms are “at the core  of ensuring access to remedy ” (guiding principle 26, commentary) .  47. However, affected people and their legal representatives can face challenges in  identifying a cause of action that maps sufficiently well onto the type of human rights harms  suffere d as a result of the use of digital technologies or the manner in which they were  designed or developed.43 Furthermore, legal theories and causes of action that focus on harms  to individuals may not be easily adapted to deal with instances of collective an d societal harm  arising from the way that technologies have been designed, used or deployed, or systemic  issues.   48. Although courts play a vital role in clarifying companies ’ legal responsibilities under  domestic law in line with the State ’s human right o bligations, there are constitutional limits  to the extent that they can correct flaws and fill gaps in underlying domestic legislative  regimes. Moreover, even comprehensive and well -designed regulatory regimes will not  ensure accountability and access to r emedy if people lack the information and knowledge to  be able to make use of them. While power and information imbalances can operate as a  significant barrier to access to remedy generally, between individuals and technology  companies these problems can be  particularly acute, for instance where abuses of human  rights have arisen as a result of the workings of algorithmic decision -making, or because of  the level of technical expertise needed to identify and analyse the uses to which different  technologies ha ve been put and their causal relationships to human rights harms .44  49. As policymakers and legislators begin to pay greater attention to the adverse human  rights impacts occasioned by the collective and societal effects of the business activities of  techn ology companies, remedy for affected rights holders is key to remediate adverse  impacts, which in many cases are not confined to domestic borders and may be global in  reach.    2. The role of State -based non -judicial mechanisms   50. The Guiding Principles highlight the vital role played by administrative, legislative  and other non -judicial mechanisms in complementing and supplementing judicial  mechanisms  (guiding principle 27, commentary) .  51. State -based non -judicial mechanisms of particular relevance to the technology sector  can include products standards authorities, licensing authorities, regulators responsible for  the implementation of data protection laws, information and privacy commissioners, State  ombudsman services , public health and safety bodies , professional standards bodies and  national human rights institutions .45 In addition, national contact points established under the  Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Guidelines for  Multinational  Enterprise s have rec ently been involved in several “specific instance  procedures ”46 involving the human rights implications of technologies and the activities of  technology companies, raised under the human rights chapter of the OECD Guidelines,  including examples of successf ul mediation.47 Such cases involved online platforms and the  use of algorithms that push ed potentially harmful content, cases concerning investor due  diligence with regard to harmful technology manufacturing in their investment portfolios,  online marketpla ces listing dangerous products for sale and telecommunications providers  that were alleged to be linked to the censorship of political dissidents of their government  clients.48  52. In some cases, for instance in cases of breaches of data protection, and wh ere non compliance with legal standards is either easy to establish or self -evident, these types of      43 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/International -Bar-Association.pdf .   44 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/AlgorithmWatch.pdf .   45  See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/NHRI_B_Tech_consultation.pdf .   46 See https://www.o ecd.org/daf/inv/mne/48004323.pdf .   47 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Poland.pdf .   48 See OECD database of specific instances .  
A/HRC/50/56    11 mechanisms can offer relatively quick and inexpensive routes to remedying human rights related harm. Moreover, well -designed and well -resourced non -judicial  mechanisms offer an  accessible and relatively fast process , while drawing on technological expertise to analyse  and help resolve underlying or contributory problems, for instance relating to product design  or deployment. Depending on their mandates and ca pabilities, these mechanisms may be able  to devise, determine or negotiate a more creative, targeted, tailored  and potentially  transformative set of remedies than might be obtained from other procedures .49  53. For the time being, however, the coverage prov ided by these types of mechanisms  remains quite patchy, with certain rights, particularly protection of the right to privacy and   freedom of expression, receiving the greatest attention.    3. Non-State -based grievance mechanisms (including company -based mech anisms)   54. In guiding principle 28 , States are called on to consider ways to facilitate access to  effective non -State -based grievance mechanisms dealing with business -related human rights  harms.50  55. As with the State -based non -judicial mechanisms discus sed above, these privately   operated mechanisms tend to be extremely diverse in terms of their design and operation, the  ways they can engage with affected individuals and communities and the kinds of remedies  they offer. In this context, t he Guiding Princi ples highlight particular ly those mechanisms  administered by a business enterprise alone or with stakeholders, by an industry association  or by a multi -stakeholder group ( guiding principle 28).   56. Multi -stakeholder and sector -level mechanisms can be particularly useful in contexts  where collaboration between business enterprises ( for example,  those connected by  commercial relationships within a supply chain) can help to facilitate the delivery of effective  remedies to affected people, for example  by creating the basis for a more level playing field  between companies in terms of basic standards and expectations, or to aid the allocation of  responsibilities for providing remedies in complex cases. However, while a number of these  types of initiatives are  presently in place or under development in other sectors (and notably  in the agricultural and garment sectors), within the technology sector most efforts to establish  privately  operated initiatives for rapid resolution of human rights -related grievances h ave  taken place at the company level.51   4. The remedy ecosystem for remedying technology -related harms   57. The technology sector is presently subject to regulation by an increasingly complex  array of laws and standards, which can vary greatly in terms of their substantive and  geographical scope, making the remedy ecosystem incomplete and hard to navigate for  affected people and groups.52  58. To ensure that people affected by business -related human rights abuses have a  “realistic and readily identifiable remedy pathway ”,53 greater attention needs to be given to  the ways in which different remediation mechanisms and processes interact, in order to  highlight areas where greater coherence and interoperability between different types of  processes ( for example,  judicial and non -judicial) may serve to enhance access to remedies  by affected people and groups.   59. Greater interoperability and coherence may be achieved, for instance, by providing  more and clearer opportunities for referral and escalation of grievances, or for pursuing  remedies for different aspects of more complex grievances through parallel proceedings.  Moreover, more creativity, innovat ion and collaboration are needed from State agencies and      49 On the role of national huma n rights institutions , see A/HRC/47/39/Add.3 .   50 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/business/ohchr -accountability -and-remedy -project -iii-enhancing effectiveness -non-state-based-grievance .   51 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/GlobalPartnersDigital -joint-submission -onbehalf -of-a-groupoforganizations.pdf#page=4 .   52 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues /Business/B -Tech/access -to-remedy ecosystem -approach.pdf .   53 Ibid. 
A/HRC/50/56   12  technology companies to respond to human rights challenges raised by the borderless online  world that technologies have helped to bring about.    5. Stakeholder reflections on access to remedy in the t echnology  sector   60. While there is an overall agreement that judicial mechanisms need to be at the core of  ensuring access to remedy, submissions pointed to the many challenges that individuals and  groups may encounter and which could possibly make judici al mechanisms less available or  appropriate than for other sectors. Such challenges include the scope of the harm, with human  rights harms arising from the use of technologies  often affect ing people in many different  jurisdictions, and potentially involvin g millions of people; that such harm requires immediate  remediation if remedy is to be effective; and the lack of sufficient understanding of  technology and its impacts among the judiciary and legislators.   61. As for State -based non -judicial mechanisms, co ncerns have been raised about the lack  of recognition among policymakers and regulators of the importance of the accessibility and  user-friendly design of State -based non -judicial mechanism s and their processes, especially  in a cross -border context. Meanin gful stakeholder consultation is fundamental for ensuring  that these types of remediation processes are well  designed and fit for purpose.54  62. While operational -level grievance mechanisms of companies could mak e it possible  for grievances to be addressed  and for adverse impacts to be remediated quickly and directly  by the companies  themselves , thereby preventing harms from compounding and grievances  from escalating, progress has been slow overall and there are currently no best practices for  remedies in the technology sector . Some technology companies have , however , developed  in-house grievance mechanisms.55 The current performance of technology companies  indicates that there is ample room for improvement with regard to the design and accessibility  of oper ational grievance mechanisms.56   III. Drivers of progress   63. Several factors can drive progress towards a better implementation of the  Guiding  Principles  across its three pillars by technology companies. This section highlights three of  those issues , which reflect current trends and work, as well as observations from stakeholders,  but are not exhaustive.    A. National action plans on business and human rights   64. The Working Group on business and human rights strongly encourages Governments  to develop national action plans on business and human rights , as one instrument for them to  implement the  Guiding Principles .57 In the field of business and human rights, a national  action plan is defined as an “evolving policy strategy developed by a State to prote ct against  adverse human rights impacts by business enterprises in conformity with the United Nations   Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights ”.58  65. National action plans  offer an opportunity for States – in close consultation with all  relevant st akeholders – to develop a comprehensive and strategic framework to identify gaps  and key priorities for action that respond to local  and national contexts.   66. A number of countries have or are in the process of developing national action plans.59  Due to a dverse impacts associated with digital technologies, there is a growing need to      54 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/business/ohchr -accountability -and-remedy -project -ii-enhancing effectiveness -state-based -non-judicial .    55 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Oversight -Board.pdf .   56 See https://rankingdigit alrights.org/index2020/indicators/G6a .   57 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/special -procedures/wg -business/national -action -plans -business -andhuman -rights .   58 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/UNWG_NAPGuidance.pdf .   59 See https://www.ohchr.org/en/special -procedures/wg -business/national -action -plans -business -andhuman -rights . 
A/HRC/50/56    13 include a section on digital technologies in national action plans  on business and human  rights , and some States are starting to do so .60 For that purpose, the Danish Institute  for  Human Rights and Global Partner s Digital have produced a guidance document on  addressing digital technologies in national action plans  on business and human rights.61   B. The potential for leverage through rights -respecting investment in the  technology sector   67. Investors have the potential to play a key role in persuading technology companies to  embed human rights  in their operations .62  68. The Guiding Principles are an important tool for rights -respecting investments,  including in technolog y companies. They set the expectations that investors at every stage of  a company ’s life  cycle – from start -up to maturity – have a responsibility to ensure that their  investments in the technology sector avoid negative human rights impacts, thereby  contri buting to the development and use of digital technologies grounded in respect for  human rights.63 Investors, alone or in collaboration, have the potential to play a transformative  role in shaping the business models, policies and practices of technolog y companies.   69. There has been growing momentum for and pressure upon investors to use their  leverage over technolog y companies to promote the responsible development and use of  technology. A still small but growing number of investors are adopting human rights policies,  disclosing their due diligence, and exercising their leverage to promote respect for human  rights amo ng technology companies.64  70. A recent wave of investor action has sought to promote respect for human rights  among digital technolog y companies , including by making public statement s on the corporate  responsibility to respect digital rights,65 engaging i n human rights dialogues with companies,  filing shareholder resolutions66 and joining peer -to-peer and multi -stakeholders initiatives. In  relation to the lat ter, the Investor Alliance for Human Rights launched an information and  communication technology an d human rights working group aimed at supporting investor  engagement with technology companies .67 The Principles for Responsible Investment   process , which works with investor signatories on incorporating environmental, social and  governance issues in investment and ownership decisions, has also launched a “human rights  and big tech” working group. Meanwhile, several investors have become members of the  Global Network Initiative.68  71. To support investor efforts to implement the Guiding Principles i n their activities, a  growing number of key guidance documents have been developed, such as the Investor      60 See, e.g., https://www.ohchr .org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Denmark_0.pdf .   61 See https://www.humanrights.dk/news/new -guidance -document -addressi ng-digital -technologies national -action -plans -business -human .   62 See A/HRC/47/39/Add.1 .   63 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B -Tech/B -Tech -Briefing Investment.pdf .   64 Areas of investor engagement  have covered a wide range of issues , including data privacy, freedom  of expression, hate speech , non -discrimination, civil rights, labour rights, child sexual exploitation  online, conflict -affected areas and whistle -blower protections.    65 For example , https://investorsforhumanrights.org/sites/default/files/attachments/2019 -01/IAHR  Statement on Digital Rights_Final %283%29.pdf .   66 See Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, “ICCR’s 2020 P roxy Resolutions  and Voting  Guide”, available at  https://www.iccr.org/iccrs -2020 -proxy -resolutions -and-voting -guide .   67 See, for example , https://investorsforhumanrights.org/news/new -slate-esg-proposals -amazon -signal ongoing -shareholder -concerns  and https://investorsforhumanrights.org/investors -engaging -palantir on-human -rights -risks .   68 See https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/2022 -03/Global -Network -Initiative.pdf#page=8 . 
A/HRC/50/56   14  Toolkit on Human Rights ,69 which provides investors with practical guidance and tools for  applying the Guiding Principles to their investment practices .70   C. Addressing risks to people connected to business models   72. More and more, t echnology  company business models are being criticized for creating  or exacerbating negative impacts on a range of human rights by accumulating extensive  behavioural data t o make increasingly accurate and highly lucrative predictions about the  interests and behaviours of individuals and groups in society.71  73. The Guiding Principles can offer insights about how to address situations in which the  most serious risks to people  are inherent in the business models of technology companies.  Indeed, the corporate responsibility to respect human rights appl ies from the moment that the  business enterprise is established and as it expands and grows, which should translate into  consider ation of whether the compan y’s business model and strategy create risks to human  rights.   74. As a starting point, technology companies should proactively identify when their  business model -driven practices, and related technology designs, create or exacerb ate human  rights risks and engage peers and stakeholder in discussions about this. Companies may then  need to take action to address such situations – whether by mitigating risks within existing  business models or by innovating entirely new ones. This is n ot to suggest that a given  business model will be fully negative. That is rarely the case. The key point is that , consistent  with the corporate responsibility to respect human rights , tech nology  companies should  “know and show ” how they address adverse ris ks or impacts to people connected to their  business models  (general principle 15, commentary) .  75. If a company cannot take effective steps to prevent or mitigate negative human rights  impacts within the framework of its existing business models, this shou ld lead to inquiries  about whether that model needs to be adapted or even transformed by the company acting  alone, on an industry -wide basis or in response to regulatory action. This will require  engagement by boards of directors, executives, entrepreneurs and founders that have an  influence on company strategy. Engagement with external stakeholders, especially affected  ones, is a critical aspect  of operating with respect for human rights, including when  addressing business -model -related human rights risks.   76. Institutional investors, as part of their responsibility to respect human rights , have a  key role to play in th is regard, having to integr ate human rights consideration s in all stages  of investing, including in how they inform and influence their investees’ business model  choices. Alongside action by investors, the policy frameworks, laws and regulations that  Governments put in place as part  of the smart  mix of measures they deploy to shape the  sector’s business practices are of critical importance in addressing business -model -related  human rights harms.    IV. Conclusions and recommendations   77. In the face of ever more complex technologies be ing developed and deployed,  along with the associated risks and challenges, the Guiding Principles are increasingly  being recogni zed as a powerful tool for public, private and civil society actors to ensure  that innovation is done responsibly and with resp ect for human rights. As noted in goal  1.3 of the road map for the next decade of business and human rights (Guiding  Principles 10+ road map ), the Guiding Principles provide “a compelling starting point      69 See https://investorsforhumanrights.org/investor -toolkit -human-rights .   70 See also https://rankingdigitalrights.org/investors/ ; https://shiftproject.org/resource/lg indicators/about -lgis/; https://investorsforhumanrights.org/ict -salient -issue -briefings -investors ;  https://www.accessnow.org/transparency -reporting -index/ ; and  https://globalnetworkinitiative.org/company -assessments/ .   71  See further https://www.ohchr.org/sites/default/files/Documents/Issues/Business/B Tech/B_Tech_Foundati onal_Paper.pdf.  
A/HRC/50/56    15 for companies and States seeking to address the poten tial harms of digital technologies  by effectively managing associated risks to people, as they precisely seek to manage the  gap between rapid change ... and the capacity of society to manage its consequences ”.  78. However, more action is clearly needed. St ates need to design technology sector  policies that are coherent and regulation s that are fully in line with the Guiding  Principles  in order to create an environment in which human rights are protected. As  for technology companies, they are a key driving f orce in shaping the digital innovation  space and a vital stakeholder in the transform ation of  the digital transition into a  responsible one  – and even more pressing, the creat ion of  a rights -respecting digital  ecosystem and inclusive space. Moreover, when human rights harms result from the  use of technologies, affected stakeholders need to have access to remedial mechanisms.  Both tech nology  companies and Governments alike need to redouble their efforts and  work together across national boundaries to overcome disjointed approaches, to  address gaps in the coverage of different remediation mechanisms, to promote greater  coherence and interoperability of differ ent regimes and processes (including in a cross border context) and to address flaws in background regimes that may be exacerbating  barriers to remedy.   79. Multi -stakeholder cooperation is crucial in addressing the challenges and  optimizing the opportuniti es arising from new technologies. A particular focus has to  be put on addressing the implications of tech nology  for people in vulnerable situations  and taking into account gender equality and the digital divide, in order to ensur e that  there is no discrimi nation and that everyone will profit from the economic and social  development new technologies can bring.   80. The Guiding Principles 10+ road map  sets out a number of recommendations ,  which are endorsed by OHCHR , on how to optimize digital transformation t hrough  respect for human rights.   81. Reflecting key parts of the road map recommendations, the B -Tech Project  outputs and the consultation and submissions received in the preparation of the present  report, OHCHR makes the following recommendations aimed at  further advancing the  practical application on the Guiding Principles to the activities of technology  companies .  82. States should:    (a) Review existing laws and policies with regard  to their applicability for  protecting human rights potentially affected by new technologies ;   (b) Adopt an appropriate smart mix of policy and regulatory measures  aligned with the Guiding Principles and developed through an inclusive consultative  process involving civil society, technology companies and other relevant stakehol ders;   (c) Use public procurement of digital technology as a tool to scale up  commitment to and implementation of respect for human rights  among businesses;    (d) Adopt appropriate measures mandating effective human rights due  diligence by technology companies ;   (e) Adopt or revise national action plans on business and human rights to  incorporate effective measures to prevent and address human rights risks relating to  technology companies ;   (f) Adopt appropriate regulatory and policy framewo rks for investors to  promote rights -respecting investment in the technology sector ;   (g) Strengthen or build multilateral alliances to promote the respect for  human rights in the tech nology  sector;    (h) Provide resources for dedicated independent bodies to  tackle human  rights issues in the technology sector , such as national human rights institutions and  data protection authorities ; 
A/HRC/50/56   16   (i) Consider the creation of funding mechanisms to support civil society  engagement on the human rights impacts of emerging t echnologies ;   (j) Review barriers in access to judicial remedy in cases involving harm by  technology companies and take effective measures to address such barriers ;   (k) Strengthen the oversight and enforcement capacity of administrative  regulatory bodies relevant to the technology sector to enable more effective measures  to protect against human rights risks related to it;   (l) Take effective measures to ensure that human rights are protected in  situations in which States contract with, partner with, licen se from or support  technology companies.   83. National human rights institutions should:    (a) Build and expand internal capacity to tackle human rights issues  associated with the technology  sector and seek cooperation with data protection  authorities and re lated players for coordinated action;    (b) Make use of the full extent of their mandate s, including by playing a key  role in ensuring policy coherence , in accordance with the Guiding Principles,  in the  regulation of the digital system .  84. Technology companies should:    (a) Ensure executive and governance oversight in managing human rights related risks , including by reviewing and addressing business -model -related risks ;   (b) In line with their corporate responsibility to respect human rights ,  conduct robust human rights due diligence across their activities and business  relationships to identify, prevent, mitigate and account for how they address actual and  potential human rights harms, including with regard to human rights risks arising from   their business models ;   (c) Take a proactive role, for example, by means of multi -stakeholder and  industry initiatives, to create more transparency and stakeholder knowledge about the  actors that make up technology “stacks” and ecosystems ;   (d) Publicly r eport on actions to mitigate human rights impacts connected  with product  or service design, development, sales, deployment and use , and their  effectiveness;    (e) Establish or participate in effective operational -level grievance  mechanisms for individuals a nd communities that may be adversely impacted by their  activities ;   (f) Engage users of tech nology , including both public and private actors , and  use leverage to effectively prevent and address human rights risks and impacts ;   (g) Improve engagement with e xperts and affected stakeholders in all aspects  of human rights due diligence, in particular in the global south ;   (h) Collaborate with Governments, other business es or business associations,  civil society and other stakeholders in exploring ways to enable access to remedy for  potential human rights impacts connected to digital technologies ;   (i) Engage in collective action with peers and other stakeholders to develop  and implement standards of business conduct and technological design that will reduc e  human rights risks, including those associated with business models ;   (j) Ensure the company plays a constructive role in processes to develop laws  and regulations aimed at increasing human rights protections for affected groups that  the firm’s business models, intentionally or otherwise, puts at risk. This includes not  undermining these processes by lobbying or wider public policy advocacy.   85. Investors should  fully embrace their responsibility to integrate human rights  consideration s in all stages of i nvesting, use their leverage to incentivize tech nology  
A/HRC/50/56    17 companies to conduct meaningful human rights due diligence, and influence investee s’  business model choices.   86. Regional and international organizations should:    (a) Foster policy coherence and define  a joint road  map on expectations of the  technology  sector with regard to the corporate responsibility to respect human rights  in line with the Guiding Principles ;   (b) Foster common ground on dangerous applications of tech nology , for  example , by forging joint understanding o f the necessity of moratoriums , or similar  action , on technologies or their applications which, at present, prove particularly  harmful for human rights and lack adequate safeguards.   87. Civil society should:    (a) Continue to identify and highlight possible protection gaps and  problematic practices created by constantly evolving digital technologies and engage  with States and business actors in addressing th ose gaps, including by effectively using  the Guiding Princi ples;   (b) Evaluate and challenge tech nology  company conduct on human rights, for  example , through benchmarks  or rankings.   88. The United Nations  should:    (a) Implement the Guiding Principles in its own operations, when it contracts  with, purchases fr om, partners with, licenses from or supports technology companies ;   (b) Promote and disseminate the Guiding Principles when engaging with  technology companies, Stat es, civil society actors, national human rights institutions   and other key actors ;   (c) Through OHCHR, continue to provide authoritative guidance on how the   Guiding Principles  apply in the technology sector , in particular regarding expectations  on the sector with regard to corporate responsibility to respect human rights in line  with the  Guiding Principles;    (d) Through OHCHR, develop a guidance tool for policymakers to inform the  regulation s aiming at the alignment of technology company conduct with the  Guiding  Principles .      
