The Age of Digital Interdependence 1 the age of  digital interdependence Report of the UN Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Digital Cooperation
Foreword Executive Summary 1. Introduction: Interdependence in the Digital Age 2. Leaving No One Behind 2.1 Creating an inclusive digital economy 2.2 Rethinking how we work and learn 2.3 Regional and global economic policy cooperation 3. Individuals, Societies and Digital Technologies 3.1 Human rights and human agency 3.2 Trust and social cohesion 3.3 Security 4. Mechanisms for Global Digital Cooperation 4.1 Challenges and gaps 4.2 Three possible architectures for global digital cooperation 4.3 The role of the UN  5. Recommendations Annexes I. Terms of Reference of the Panel II. Panel Members III. Panel Secretariat and Support Teams IV. Donors V. The Panel’s Engagement VI. Principles and Functions of Digital Cooperation Notes3 4 6 9 9 12 13 16 16 18 19 22 22 23 27 29 33 33 34 35 36 37 39 40 The Age of Digital Interdependence 2Contents
The Age of Digital Interdependence 3We live in an era of increasing interdependence and accelerating change, much of it driven by  technological advances such as low-cost computing, the internet and mobile connectivity. Moments  of change present new opportunities to solve old problems. The efficiency, innovation, and speed of a  digitally connected world can expand what is possible for everyone – including those who historically  have been marginalised.  At the same time, humanity faces significant new challenges. Modern technologies can be used to erode  security and violate privacy. We are also beginning to see complex impacts on education systems and  labor markets. We believe the opportunities for human progress in the digital age ultimately outweigh the challenges  – if we join together in a spirit of cooperation and inclusiveness.  We urgently need to lay the foundations of an inclusive digital economy and society for all. We need to  focus our energies on policies and investments that will enable people to use technology to build better  lives and a more peaceful, trusting world. Making this vision a reality will require all stakeholders to find  new ways of working together. That is why the Secretary General appointed this Panel and what we have  sought to do with this Report.  We are grateful to each member of the Panel, the Secretariat, and the many groups and individuals we  consulted; though the views expressed were not always in agreement, they were always conveyed with  respect and in the spirit of collaboration.  No one knows how technology will evolve, but we do know that our path forward must be built through  cooperation and illuminated by shared human values. We hope this Report will contribute to improved  understanding of the opportunities and challenges ahead, so that together we can shape a more  inclusive and sustainable future for all.Foreword Melinda Gates Co-ChairJack Ma Co-Chair 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 4Digital technologies are rapidly transforming society, simultaneously  allowing for unprecedented advances in the human condition and giving rise  to profound new challenges. Growing opportunities created by the application  of digital technologies are paralleled by stark abuses and unintended  consequences. Digital dividends co-exist with digital divides. And, as  technological change has accelerated, the mechanisms for cooperation and  governance of this landscape have failed to keep pace. Divergent approaches  and ad hoc responses threaten to fragment the interconnectedness that  defines the digital age, leading to competing standards and approaches,  lessening trust and discouraging cooperation. Sensing the urgency of the moment, in July 2018 the Secretary-General of the  United Nations (UN) appointed this Panel to consider the question of “digital  cooperation” – the ways we work together to address the social, ethical,  legal and economic impact of digital technologies in order to maximise their  benefits and minimise their harm. In particular, the Secretary-General asked  us to consider how digital cooperation can contribute to the achievement  of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – the ambitious agenda to  protect people and the planet endorsed by 193 UN member states in 2015.  He also asked us to consider models of digital cooperation to advance the  debate surrounding governance in the digital sphere. In our consultations – both internally and with other stakeholders – it quickly  became clear that our dynamic digital world urgently needs improved  digital cooperation and that we live in an age of digital interdependence.  Such cooperation must be grounded in common human values – such as  inclusiveness, respect, human-centredness, human rights, international law,  transparency and sustainability. In periods of rapid change and uncertainty such  as today, these shared values must be a common light which helps guide us.  Effective digital cooperation requires that multilateralism, despite  current strains, be strengthened. It also requires that multilateralism be  complemented by multi-stakeholderism – cooperation that involves not only  governments but a far more diverse spectrum of other stakeholders such  as civil society, academics, technologists and the private sector. We need  to bring far more diverse voices to the table, particularly from developing  countries and traditionally marginalised groups, such as women, youth,  indigenous people, rural populations and older people.  After an introduction which highlights the urgency of improved digital  cooperation and invites readers to commit to a Declaration of Digital  Interdependence, our report focuses on three broad sets of interlocking  issues, each of which is discussed in one subsequent chapter. As a panel,  we strove for consensus, but we did not always agree. We have noted areas  where our views differed and tried to give a balanced summary of our debates  and perspectives. While there was not unanimity of opinion among the Panel  members regarding all of the recommendations, the Panel does endorse the  full report in the spirit of promoting digital cooperation. Chapter 2, Leaving No One Behind , argues that digital technologies will only  help progress towards the full sweep of the SDGs if we think more broadly than the important issue of access to the internet and digital technologies.  Access is a necessary, but insufficient, step forward. To capture the power  of digital technologies we need to cooperate on the broader ecosystems  that enable digital technologies to be used in an inclusive manner. This  will require policy frameworks that directly support economic and social  inclusion, special efforts to bring traditionally marginalised groups to the  fore, important investments in both human capital and infrastructure, smart  regulatory environments, and significant efforts to assist workers facing  disruption from technology’s impact on their livelihoods. This chapter also  addresses financial inclusion – including mobile money, digital identification  and e-commerce –, affordable and meaningful access to the internet, digital  public goods, the future of education, and the need for regional and global  economic policy cooperation.   Chapter 3, Individuals, Societies and Digital Technologies , underscores the  fact that universal human rights apply equally online as offline, but that there  is an urgent need to examine how time-honoured human rights frameworks  and conventions should guide digital cooperation and digital technology. We  need society-wide conversations about the boundaries, norms and shared  aspirations for the uses of digital technologies, including complicated  issues like privacy, human agency and security in order to achieve inclusive  and equitable outcomes. This chapter also discusses the right to privacy,  the need for clear human accountability for autonomous systems, and  calls for strengthening efforts to develop and implement global norms on  cybersecurity. To take significant steps toward the vision identified in Chapters 2 and 3, we  feel the following priority actions deserve immediate attention:  AN INCLUSIVE DIGITAL ECONOMY AND  SOCIETY 1A:   We recommend that by 2030, every adult should have affordable  access to digital networks, as well as digitally-enabled financial and  health services, as a means to make a substantial contribution to  achieving the SDGs. Provision of these services should guard against  abuse by building on emerging principles and best practices, one example  of which is providing the ability to opt in and opt out, and by encouraging  informed public discourse.  1B:   We recommend that a broad, multi-stakeholder alliance, involving  the UN, create a platform for sharing digital public goods, engaging talent  and pooling data sets, in a manner that respects privacy, in areas related  to attaining the SDGs.  1C:   We call on the private sector, civil society, national governments,  multilateral banks and the UN to adopt specific policies to support full digital  inclusion and digital equality for women and traditionally marginalised  groups. International organisations such as the World Bank and the UN Executive Summary
The Age of Digital Interdependence 5should strengthen research and promote action on barriers women and  marginalised groups face to digital inclusion and digital equality.  1D:   We believe that a set of metrics for digital inclusiveness should  be urgently agreed, measured worldwide and detailed with sex  disaggregated data in the annual reports of institutions such as the  UN, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, other multilateral  development banks and the OECD. From this, strategies and plans of  action could be developed.  HUMAN AND INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY 2:  We recommend the establishment of regional and global digital  help desks to help governments, civil society and the private sector to  understand digital issues and develop capacity to steer cooperation  related to social and economic impacts of digital technologies.  HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMAN AGENCY  3A:   Given that human rights apply fully in the digital world, we urge  the UN Secretary-General to institute an agencies-wide review of how  existing international human rights accords and standards apply to new  and emerging digital technologies. Civil society, governments, the private  sector and the public should be invited to submit their views on how to  apply existing human rights instruments in the digital age in a proactive  and transparent process.  3B:     In the face of growing threats to human rights and safety, including  those of children, we call on social media enterprises to work with  governments, international and local civil society organisations and  human rights experts around the world to fully understand and respond  to concerns about existing or potential human rights violations.  3C:   We believe that autonomous intelligent systems should be  designed in ways that enable their decisions to be explained and  humans to be accountable for their use. Audits and certification schemes  should monitor compliance of artificial intelligence (AI) systems with  engineering and ethical standards, which should be developed using  multi-stakeholder and multilateral approaches. Life and death decisions  should not be delegated to machines. We call for enhanced digital  cooperation with multiple stakeholders to think through the design and  application of these standards and principles such as transparency and  non-bias in autonomous intelligent systems in different social settings.  TRUST, SECURITY AND STABILITY 4.   We recommend the development of a Global Commitment on Digital  Trust and Security to shape a shared vision, identify attributes of digital  stability, elucidate and strengthen the implementation of norms for  responsible uses of technology, and propose priorities for action. If we are to deliver on the promise of digital technologies for the SDGs,  including the above-mentioned priority action areas, and avoid the risks of  their misuse, we need purposeful digital cooperation arrangements. To this  end, in Chapter 4, Mechanisms for Global Digital Cooperation, we analyse  gaps in the current mechanisms of global digital cooperation, identify the  functions of global digital cooperation needed to address them, and outline three sets of modalities on how to improve our global digital cooperation  architecture – which build on existing structures and arrangements in ways  consistent with our shared values and principles.  Given the wide spectrum of issues, there will of necessity be many forms of  digital cooperation; some may be led by the private sector or civil society  rather than government or international organisations. Moreover, special  efforts are needed to ensure inclusive participation by women and other  traditionally marginalised groups in all new or updated methods of global  digital cooperation.  The three proposed digital cooperation architectures presented are intended  to ignite focused, agile and open multi-stakeholder consultations in order  to quickly develop updated digital governance mechanisms. The 75th  Anniversary of the UN in 2020 presents an opportunity for an early harvest  in the form of a “Global Commitment for Digital Cooperation” enshrining goals,  principles, and priority actions. The chapter also discusses the role of the UN, both in adapting to the digital  age and in contributing to improved global digital cooperation.  We feel the following steps are warranted to update digital governance:   GLOBAL DIGITAL COOPERATION 5A:      We recommend that, as a matter of urgency, the UN SecretaryGeneral facilitate an agile and open consultation process to develop  updated mechanisms for global digital cooperation, with the options  discussed in Chapter 4 as a starting point. We suggest an initial goal of  marking the UN's 75th anniversary in 2020 with a “Global Commitment for  Digital Cooperation” to enshrine shared values, principles, understandings  and objectives for an improved global digital cooperation architecture. As  part of this process, we understand that the UN Secretary-General may  appoint a Technology Envoy. 5B:       We support a multi-stakeholder “systems” approach for cooperation  and regulation that is adaptive, agile, inclusive and fit for purpose for the  fast-changing digital age.  We hope this report and its recommendations will form part of the building  blocks of an inclusive and interdependent digital world, with a fit-for-purpose  new governance architecture. We believe in a future in which improved digital  cooperation can support the achievement of the SDGs, reduce inequalities,  bring people together, enhance international peace and security, and  promote economic opportunity and environmental sustainability.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 6Digital technologies are rapidly transforming societies and economies,  simultaneously advancing the human condition and creating profound and  unprecedented challenges. How well are we managing the complex impacts  on our individual and collective lives? How can we use digital technologies to  contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals? What  are current best practices and gaps in digital cooperation? What new ways of  working together are needed, and who should be involved? These are among the questions the UN Secretary-General asked us to  consider.1  We approached our task with both humility and urgency. The  challenges are multi-faceted and rapidly evolving. The potential that could be  unlocked by improved digital cooperation is enormous – and so are the perils  if humanity fails to create more effective and inclusive ways for citizens, civil  society, governments, academia and the private sector to work together. “Digital cooperation” is used in this report to describe ways of working  together to address the societal, ethical, legal and economic impacts  of digital technologies in order to maximise benefits to society and  minimise harms. As digital technologies have come to touch almost every aspect of modern  life, a patchwork of cooperation and governance mechanisms has gradually  emerged to generate norms, standards, policies and protocols in this arena.  In 2015, the United Nations identified 680 distinct mechanisms related to  digital cooperation,2 and the number has since risen to over a thousand.3 In  many technical areas, these mechanisms work well. But they struggle to  keep up with the unprecedented pace and increasingly wide range of change.  While digital technologies have been developing for many years, in the  last decade their cumulative impacts have become so deep, wide-ranging  and fast-changing as to herald the dawn of a new age. The cost of massive  computing power has fallen.4 Billions of people and devices have come  online.5 Digital content now crosses borders in vast volumes, with constant  shifts in what is produced and how and where it is used.  The spread of digital technologies has already improved the world in myriad ways.  It has, for example, revolutionised the ability to communicate with others and to  share and access knowledge. Individuals from long-neglected populations have  used mobile money and other financial services for the first time, and started  businesses that reach both domestic and global markets.6 If we are to achieve  the flagship ambition of the Sustainable Development Goals, to end extreme  poverty by 2030, improved digital cooperation will need to play a vital role.  But digital technologies have also brought new and very serious concerns.  Around the world, many people are increasingly – and rightly – worried that our growing reliance on digital technologies has created new ways for  individuals, companies and governments to intentionally cause harm or to  act irresponsibly. Virtually every day brings new stories about hatred being  spread on social media, invasion of privacy by businesses and governments,  cyber-attacks using weaponised digital technologies or states violating the  rights of political opponents. 7 And many people have been left out of the benefits of digital technology.  Digital dividends co-exist with digital divides. Well more than half the world’s  population still either lacks affordable access to the internet or is using  only a fraction of its potential despite being connected.8 People who lack  safe and affordable access to digital technologies are overwhelmingly from  groups who are already marginalised: women, elderly people and those with  disabilities; indigenous groups; and those who live in poor, remote or rural  areas.9 Many existing inequalities – in wealth, opportunity, education, and  health – are being widened further. The speed and scale of change is increasing – and the agility, responsiveness  and scope of cooperation and governance mechanisms needs rapidly  to improve. We cannot afford to wait any longer to develop better ways to  cooperate, collaborate and reach consensus. We urgently need new forms  of digital cooperation to ensure that digital technologies are built on a  foundation of respect for human rights and provide meaningful opportunity  for all people and nations. The speed and scale of change  is increasing – and the agility,  responsiveness and scope of cooperation  and governance mechanisms needs  rapidly to improve. We cannot afford  to wait any longer to develop better  ways to cooperate, collaborate and  reach consensus. We urgently need new  forms of digital cooperation to ensure  that digital technologies are built on a  foundation of respect for human rights  and provide meaningful opportunity for all  people and nations.1. Introduction: Interdependence in  the Digital Age "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 7OUR DIGITAL INTERDEPENDENCE If we want to use digital technologies to improve life for everyone, we will have  to go about it consciously and deliberately – with civil society, companies  and governments recognising their interdependence and working together.  The unique benefits and profound risks arising from the dramatic increase  in computing power and interconnectivity in the digital age reinforce our  underlying interdependence. Globally and locally, we are increasingly linked  in an ever-expanding digital web, just as we are increasingly linked, and  mutually dependent, in the spheres of economics, public well-being and the  environment.  The critical need to improve digital cooperation comes at a time when many  of the mechanisms of multilateral cooperation developed since World War II  are under unprecedented duress. Although far from perfect, these avenues  for cooperation between national governments underpinned one of the  most peaceful and productive periods in human history. Their erosion is  dangerous: it will make it harder to capitalise on the benefits of digital  technologies and mitigate the hazards.   Reinvigorating multilateralism alone will not be sufficient. Effective digital  cooperation requires that multilateralism be complemented by multistakeholderism – cooperation that involves governments and a diverse  spectrum of other stakeholders such as civil society, technologists,  academics, and the private sector (ranging from small enterprises to large  technology companies).   While only governments can make laws, all these stakeholders are needed to  contribute to effective governance by cooperating to assess the complex and  dynamic impacts of digital technologies and developing shared norms, standards  and practices. We need to bring far more diverse voices to the table, particularly  from developing countries and traditionally marginalised populations. Important  digital issues have often been decided behind closed doors, without the  involvement of those who are most affected by the decisions.  The unique benefits and risks arising from  the dramatic increase in computing power  and interconnectivity in the digital age  reinforce our underlying interdependence. Managing digital technologies to maximise benefits to society and minimise  harms requires a far-sighted and wide-ranging view of the complex ways in  which they interact with societal, environmental, ethical, legal and economic  systems. The Panel is enormously grateful to the many individuals,  institutions and others who provided us with their insights and expertise  as we sought to better understand how to navigate this new landscape. We  endeavoured to consult as broadly as possible in the time available.  Drawing on many thoughtful reflections,10 we identified the following nine  values that we believe should shape the development of digital cooperation:  • Inclusiveness – Leaving no one behind, so that we can maximise   equality of opportunity, access and outcomes to achieve the Sustainable   Development Goals;  • Respect – Embodying respect for human rights and human dignity,   diversity, the safety and security of personal data and devices, and   national and international law; • Human-centredness – Maximising benefits to humans, and ensuring that   humans remain responsible for decisions;  • Human flourishing – Promoting sustainable economic growth, the social   good and opportunities for self-realisation; • Transparency – Promoting open access to information and operations;  • Collaboration – Upholding open standards and interoperability to   facilitate collaboration; • Accessibility – Developing affordable, simple and reliable devices and   services for as diverse a range of users as possible;  • Sustainability – Furthering the aim of a zero-carbon, zero-waste   economy that does not compromise the ability of future generations to   meet their own needs; and,  • Harmony – The use by governments and businesses of digital   technologies in ways that earn the trust of peers, partners and people,   and that avoid exploiting or exacerbating divides and conflicts. ABOUT THIS REPORT As a panel, we strove for consensus, but we did not always agree. We have  noted areas where our views differed and tried to give a balanced summary  of our debates and perspectives. While there was not unanimity of opinion  among the Panel members regarding all of the recommendations, the Panel  does endorse the full report in the spirit of promoting digital cooperation. The next three chapters highlight issues that emerged from the Panel’s  deliberations, setting out the backdrop for the recommendations in the final  chapter. Our report does not aim to be comprehensive – some important  topics are touched briefly or not at all – but to focus on areas where we felt  digital cooperation could make the greatest difference. These chapters deal  broadly with the areas of economics, society and governance, while noting  that many issues – such as capacity, infrastructure and data – are relevant  to all. Chapter 2, Leaving No One Behind, assesses the contribution of digital  technologies to the Sustainable Development Goals. It addresses issues  including financial inclusion, affordable and meaningful access to the  internet, the future of education and jobs and the need for regional and global  economic policy cooperation.   Chapter 3, Individuals, Societies and Digital Technologies, discusses the  application of human rights to the digital age, the need to keep human rights  and human agency at the centre of technological development, and the  imperative to improve cooperation on digital security and trust.  Chapter 4, Mechanisms for Global Digital Cooperation, identifies gaps in  current mechanisms of global digital cooperation, the functions of digital  cooperation and principles digital cooperation should aim to follow, provides  three options for potential new global digital cooperation architectures, and  discusses the role of the United Nations in promoting digital cooperation.  Drawing on the analysis in the preceding chapters, Chapter 5 shares and  explains our Recommendations for shaping our common digital future."
The Age of Digital Interdependence 8As members of the Panel, we brought a wide range of experience of working in  government, business, academic institutions, philanthropy and civil society  organisations – but we engaged in our task as equal citizens of a digitalising  world, appreciating the vital role of all stakeholders and the need for humility  and cooperation. In this spirit, we invite all stakeholders to commit to a Declaration of Digital  Interdependence: Humanity is still in the foothills of the digital age. The peaks are yet uncharted, and their promise still untold.  But the risks of losing our foothold are apparent: dangerous  adventurism among states, exploitative behaviour by  companies, regulation that stifles innovation and trade, and  an unforgivable failure to realise vast potential for advancing  human development. How we manage the opportunities and risks of rapid  technological change will profoundly impact our future and the  future of the planet.We believe that our aspirations and vulnerabilities are deeply  interconnected and interdependent; that no one individual,  institution, corporation or government alone can or should manage  digital developments; and that it is essential that we work through  our differences in order to shape our common digital future.  We declare our commitment to building on our shared values  and collaborating in new ways to realise a vision of humanity’s  future in which affordable and accessible digital technologies are  used to enable economic growth and social opportunity, lessen  inequality, enhance peace and security, promote environmental  sustainability, preserve human agency, advance human rights  and meet human needs.DECLARATION OF DIGITAL INTERDEPENDENCE
The Age of Digital Interdependence 9The Sustainable Development Goals represent humanity’s shared  commitment to achieve ambitious global gains for people and the planet by  2030. Of the SDG’s 17 goals and 169 targets, not a single one is detached  from the implications and potential of digital technology. From ending  extreme poverty, to promoting inclusive economic growth and decent work,  to reducing maternal mortality, to achieving universal literacy and numeracy  and doubling the productivity of small farmers – progress is intertwined with  the use of digital technology and new forms of digital cooperation.11  However, technological solutions are not enough. Diverse political systems,  history, culture, resource constraints and other factors which have  marginalised far too many people, are – and will continue to be – of critical  importance. The application of technology must be aligned with investments  in human capital, infrastructure and environmental protection. Widening  access to digital technologies is necessary, but not sufficient. Access needs  to be affordable to be meaningful. Special efforts are needed to remove  barriers for marginalised groups who often face a double bind: they already  face discrimination in its many analogue forms and are least likely to be  connected. Pre-existing forms of marginalisation should not be perpetuated  or aggravated in the digital sphere.  Success will require a commitment by all involved stakeholders to hard work  and learning over many years about how to broaden opportunity and build  truly inclusive economies and societies. We believe that there is significant  room for digital technology and improved cooperation to contribute to these  efforts. 2.1 CREATING AN INCLUSIVE DIGITAL  ECONOMY With mobile internet and increasingly powerful and lower cost computing,  every person can theoretically connect to anyone else, obtain and generate  knowledge, or engage in commercial or social activity.12 For organisations of  whatever size, likewise, there are fewer technical barriers to global economic  interaction at scale. Digital technology can support economic inclusion by  breaking down barriers to information, broadening access, and lowering the  level of skills needed to participate in the economy. 13 Of course, this does not mean that everyone and everything should be  connected or digitised. Nor does it mean that the social and economic  consequences of digital technology are necessarily inclusive or beneficial.  Digital technology can both provide opportunity and accentuate inequality.  The challenge for policy makers, and other stakeholders seeking to contribute  to progress toward the SDGs, is how to cooperate to leverage technology to  create a more inclusive society. As we emphasise in this chapter and our  recommendations, we believe digital cooperation must steer how digital  technologies are developed and deployed to create meaningful economic  opportunities for all. Developing an inclusive digital economy will require sustained and coherent  effort from many stakeholders across all walks of life. National policy  frameworks and international agreements need to find ways to promote  financial inclusion, innovation, investment and growth while protecting  people and the environment, keeping competition fair and the tax base  sustainable. Developing an inclusive digital economy  will require sustained and coherent effort  from many stakeholders across all walks  of life. National policy frameworks and  international agreements need to find  ways to promote financial inclusion,  innovation, investment and growth while  protecting people and the environment,  keeping competition fair and the tax base  sustainable. FINANCIAL INCLUSION: MOBILE MONEY,  DIGITAL IDENTIFICATION AND E-COMMERCE The ability of digital technologies to empower traditionally marginalised people  and drive inclusive economic development is illustrated by financial inclusion.  14 Mobile money, digital identification and e-commerce have given many more  people the ability to save and transact securely without needing cash, insure  against risks, borrow to grow their businesses and reach new markets.  According to the World Bank’s Global Findex 2017 report, 69 percent of adults  have an account with a financial institution, up by seven percentage points  since 2014. That means over half a billion adults gained access to financial  tools in three years. But many are still left behind, and there is scope for  further rapid progress: a billion people who still have no access to financial  services already have a mobile phone. 15 Mobile money – the ability to send, receive and store money using a mobile  phone – has brought financial services to people who have long been ignored  by traditional banks.16 It reaches remote regions without physical bank  branches. It can also help women access financial services – an important  aspect of equality, given that in many countries women are less likely than  men to have a bank account.   New business models enable people who have no physical collateral  to demonstrate to lenders that they are creditworthy – for example, by  allowing the lenders to see phone location data and online transaction and 2. Leaving No One Behind "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 10payment history.18  Mobile finance matters in wealthy countries, too, where  low-income and historically marginalised groups generally both pay higher  interest rates and receive a narrower range of financial services.19 Well-known examples of mobile money include Kenya’s M-Pesa and China’s  Alipay. Launched in 2007 by Vodafone, M-Pesa received support from  diverse stakeholders who all have a role to play in digital cooperation.  A private sector innovation with donor funding, it originally addressed  microfinance clients in partnership with civil society – then citizens found  new uses, including low cost person-to-person transfers.20 Alipay has made  millions of small business loans to online merchants, more than half of whom  are aged under 30. 21 What works in one country may not work in another.22 Rather than try to  replicate specific successes, digital cooperation should aim to highlight  best practices, standards and principles that can create conditions for local  innovations to emerge and grow based on local issues, needs and cultural  values. India, for example, has added 300 million bank accounts in three  years as new business models have been built on the India Stack, a set of  government-managed online standards in areas including online payments  and digital identity. 23 Across many areas of financial inclusion, fragmented systems and lack  of cooperation within and across states make it difficult to fully realise  the benefits of digital technology. Common standards for cross-border  interoperability of mobile money could unleash much more innovation:  discussions to develop them should be a priority for digital cooperation. 24 Digital identification (ID) can support inclusive economic development more  broadly. More than a billion people today lack an official way to prove their  identity: this means they may not be able to vote, open a bank account,  transact online, own land, start a business, connect to utilities or access  public services such as health care or education.25 The consulting firm  McKinsey & Company studied seven large countries and concluded that  digital ID systems could add between 3 and 13% to their gross domestic  product. 26 However, digital ID systems require caution. A digital ID can help unlock new  opportunities but can also introduce new risks and challenges. They can be  used to undermine human rights – for example, by enabling civil society to  be targeted, or selected groups to be excluded from social benefits.27 Data  breaches can invade the privacy of millions. To minimise risks, countries  should introduce a digital ID system only after a broad national conversation  and allow for voluntary enrolment and viable alternatives for those who opt  out. They should establish ways to monitor use and redress misuse. Countries  could cooperate to share experience and best practices in this regard. The World Bank Identification for Development (ID4D) initiative has  identified ten Principles of Digital Identification covering inclusion, design  and governance “to improve development outcomes while maintaining trust  and privacy”.28  This initiative draws on the experiences of countries that  have already implemented digital ID systems. Among the most successful  is Estonia, where citizens can use their digital ID to access over 2,000 online  government services. Building on the positive and cautionary lessons of early  adopters, the Modular Open Source Identity Platform (MOSIP) is developing  open source code countries can adapt to design their own systems. 29   Recent years have also seen a dramatic increase in e-commerce, including  by individuals and small businesses selling products and services using  online platforms. When e-commerce platforms provide technological services to small entrepreneurs, rather than compete with them, they can  level the playing field: it is relatively cheap and simple to start a business  online, and entrepreneurs can reach markets far beyond their local area.     Inclusive e-commerce, which promotes participation of small firms in the  digital economy, is particularly important for the SDGs as it can create new  opportunities for traditionally excluded groups. In China, for example, an  estimated 10 million small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) sell on the  Taobao platform; nearly half of the entrepreneurs on the platform are women,  and more than 160,000 are people with disabilities.30 E-commerce can  support rural economic inclusion as clusters of villages can develop market  niches in certain types of products: in China, an estimated 3,000 “Taobao  villages” have annual online sales of more than one million dollars annually.31  A growing e-commerce sector also creates demand and employment in  related businesses including logistics, software, customised manufacturing  and content production. E-commerce shows how digital technologies with supportive policies  can contribute to inclusive economic development – it has done best  in countries where it is relatively easy to set up a business, and where  traditionally neglected populations are able to get online.32 As with inclusive  mobile finance, as more individuals and small enterprises buy and sell  internationally, there is also a need to create more supportive rules for crossborder e-commerce.    As e-commerce grows, there are also concerns about its relation to local and  international markets, as discussed below in Section 2.3. HARNESSING DATA AND ‘DIGITAL PUBLIC  GOODS’ FOR DEVELOPMENT The immense power and value of data in the modern economy can and  must be harnessed to meet the SDGs, but this will require new models of  collaboration.  The Panel discussed potential pooling of data in areas such as health,  agriculture and the environment to enable scientists and thought leaders  to use data and artificial intelligence to better understand issues and find  new ways to make progress on the SDGs. Such data commons would require  criteria for establishing relevance to the SDGs, standards for interoperability,  rules on access and safeguards to ensure privacy and security. The immense power and value of data in  the modern economy can and must be  harnessed to meet the SDGs, but this will  require new models of collaboration.  We also need to generate more data relevant to the SDGs. In a world which  has seen exponential growth of data in recent years,33  many people remain  invisible. For example, the 2018 UN SDG Report notes that only 73 percent  of children under the age of 5 have had their births registered.34 The World  Health Organization (WHO) estimated in 2014 that two-thirds of deaths  are not registered.35 Only 11 countries in sub-Saharan Africa have data on  poverty from surveys conducted after 2015. Most countries do not collect  sex-disaggregated data on internet access. 36"
The Age of Digital Interdependence 11Anonymised data – information that is rendered anonymous in such a  way that the data subject is not or no longer identifiable – about progress  toward the SDGs is generally less sensitive and controversial than the use  of personal data of the kind companies such as Facebook, Twitter or Google  may collect to drive their business models, or facial and gait data that  could be used for surveillance.37 However, personal data can also serve  development goals, if handled with proper oversight to ensure its security  and privacy.  For example, individual health data is extremely sensitive – but many  people’s health data, taken together, can allow researchers to map  disease outbreaks, compare the effectiveness of treatments and improve  understanding of conditions. Aggregated data from individual patient cases  was crucial to containing the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.38 Private and  public sector healthcare providers around the world are now using various  forms of electronic medical records. These help individual patients by making  it easier to personalise health services, but the public health benefits require  these records to be interoperable.   There is scope to launch collaborative projects to test the interoperability  of data, standards and safeguards across the globe. The World Health  Assembly’s consideration of a global strategy for digital health in 2020  presents an opportunity to launch such projects, which could initially be  aimed at global health challenges such as Alzheimer’s and hypertension.39    The slowing progress in bringing more  people online points to the urgent need  for new approaches to building digital  infrastructure, a complex task that  requires better coordination among  many stakeholders: governments,  international organisations,  communications service providers,  makers of hardware and software,  providers of digital services and  content, civil society and the various  groups that oversee protocols and  standards on which digital networks  operate. Improved digital cooperation on a data-driven approach to public health  has the potential to lower costs, build new partnerships among hospitals,  technology companies, insurance providers and research institutes and  support the shift from treating diseases to improving wellness. Appropriate  safeguards are needed to ensure the focus remains on improving health care  outcomes. With testing, experience and necessary protective measures as  well as guidelines for the responsible use of data, similar cooperation could  emerge in many other fields related to the SDGs, from education to urban  planning to agriculture.Data collaboration for climate change, agriculture and the  environment The Platform for Big Data in Agriculture was launched in 2017 by the  Colombia-based International Center for Tropical Agriculture after  consultation with public, private and non-profit stakeholders. By  providing ways to share data on agriculture, it seeks to transform  research and innovation in food security, sustainability and climate  change.40 More broadly, cheaper sensors generating more data – and better AI  algorithms to analyse it – can further improve our understanding of  how complex environmental systems interact and the likely impacts  of climate change.41    Digital technologies can also be used to reduce waste. The methods  of complex coordination that have lowered costs by enabling supply  chains to touch every corner of the planet can also help to meet  higher environmental standards and design devices with repair,  reuse, upgrading and recycling in mind. For this, new forms of digital  cooperation and data sharing would be needed among suppliers,  customers and competitors. Many types of digital technologies and content – from data to apps, data  visualisation tools to educational curricula – could accelerate achievement  of the SDGs. When they are freely and openly available, with minimal  restrictions on how they can be distributed, adapted and reused, we can  think of them as “digital public goods”.42 In economics, a “public good” is  something which anyone can use without charge and without preventing  others from using it.43 Digital content and technologies lend themselves to  being public goods in this respect. Combinations of digital public goods can create “common rails” for innovation  of inclusive digital products and services. The India Stack is an example of  how a unified, multi-layered software platform with clear standards, provided  by public entities, can give government agencies and entrepreneurs the  technological building blocks to improve service delivery and develop new  business models which promote economic inclusion.44    There is currently no “go to” place for discovering, engaging with, building,  and investing in digital public goods. Along the lines of the MOSIP model –  and with the participation of civil society and other stakeholders – such a  platform could create great value by enabling the sharing and adaptation of  digital technologies and content across countries in a wider range of areas  relevant to achieving the SDGs.  EXPANDING ACCESS TO DIGITAL  INFRASTRUCTURE The proportion of people online in the developing world expanded rapidly in  the last decade – from 14.5% in 2008 to 45.3% in 2018 – but progress has  recently slowed.45 Internet access in many parts of the world is still too slow  and expensive to be effectively used.46 The cost of mobile data as a percent  of income increased in nearly half the countries according to a recent study.47  Without affordable access, advances in digital technologies disproportionately  benefit those already connected, contributing to greater inequality."
The Age of Digital Interdependence 12The people being left behind are typically those who can least afford  it. Growth in new internet connections is slowest in the lowest-income  countries.48 Rural areas continue to lag, as companies prioritise improving  access in more densely populated areas which will offer a better return on  investment.49 The slowing progress in bringing more people online points to the urgent  need for new approaches to building digital infrastructure, a complex task  that requires better coordination among many stakeholders: governments,  international organisations, communications service providers, makers of  hardware and software, providers of digital services and content, civil society  and the various groups that oversee protocols and standards on which  digital networks operate.50 As these actors cooperate, it also represents an  important moment to re-emphasise and address the complex social, cultural  and economic factors that continue to marginalise many groups. It is not an easy task: progress is slowing despite there being an active  community of donors, experts and other institutions committed to universal  digital connectivity. The Alliance for Affordable Internet, for example,  brings together companies, civil society organisations and governments to  conduct research and policy advocacy on driving down the cost to connect  and achieve universal, affordable internet access.51 The International  Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific  and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) lead the Broadband Commission,52 the  United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)’s Project Connect maps schools  using satellite data and artificial intelligence,53 and the World Bank provides  loans and grants for connectivity projects.54   There has also been considerable private sector activity in this arena. Loon,  a project of Google’s parent company Alphabet, uses internet-enabled  balloons – in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria, they provided connectivity  to 200,000 in Puerto Rico.55 Amazon, OneWeb, Telesat, Space Norway and  SpaceX are among companies considering connectivity solutions using lowearth orbit satellites.56 Some countries, such as Indonesia, have set targets that treat internet  connectivity as a national priority.57 While finance alone will not achieve  universal internet access, it can help if invested wisely: some countries  are generating financing from fees on existing communication network  providers to help expand systems to those who are currently uncovered, for  example through Universal Service Funds.58 Advance market commitments deserve further consideration as a  possible way to incentivise investment, as they have in other areas  such as vaccine developments. They involve a commitment to pay for  a future product or service once it exists; the commitment in this case  could come from consortia of governments, international organisations  or others interested in enabling specific uses in areas such as health or  education.59   Many local groups are also working on small-scale community solutions: for  example, a rural community of 6,000 people in Mankosi, South Africa, built  a solar-powered “mesh network” in collaboration with a university.60 Such  community projects are often not just about getting online but building  skills and empowering locals to use technology for development and  entrepreneurship.61   Digital cooperation should increase coordination among the public and  private entities working in this space and help tailor approaches to economic,  cultural and geographic contexts. Governments have an important role to play in creating a policy framework to enable private sector enterprise,  innovation, and cooperative, bottom-up networks.  SUPPORTING MARGINALISED GROUPS AND  MEASURING INCLUSIVENESS Even where getting online is possible and affordable, extra efforts are  needed to empower groups that are discriminated against and excluded.  For example, digital technologies are often not easily accessible for elderly  people or those with disabilities;62 indigenous people have little digital  content in their native languages;63 and globally an estimated 12 percent  more men use the internet than women. 64  Even where getting online is possible and  affordable, extra efforts are needed to  empower groups that are discriminated  against and excluded. Responses need to address deep and complex social and cultural factors,  such as those contributing to the gender gap in access to and usage of  mobile phones, smart phones and digital services – gaps which persist in  many cases despite increases in women’s income and education levels.65  Social marketing could play a role in changing attitudes, as it has in many  other areas with backing from donors, governments and civil society  organisations.66 Initiatives to improve access for marginalised populations  should start with consultation involving these groups in the design,  deployment and evaluation of such efforts.  Efforts to improve digital inclusion would be greatly helped if there were  a clear and agreed set of metrics to monitor it. Initial work – notably by  the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),  the Group of Twenty (G20), ITU, and the Economist Intelligence Unit –  needs to be broadened to reflect the wide variety of global contexts and,  importantly, needs greater buy-in and participation from developing  countries.67 The Panel urges international organisations, civil society  and governments to develop action plans around reliable and consistent  measures of digital inclusion with sex disaggregated data. Discussion  about measurements and definitions would also focus attention on the  issues underlying inclusion.  2.2 RETHINKING HOW WE WORK AND  LEARN  Many previous waves of technological change have shifted what skills  are demanded in the labour market, making some jobs obsolete while  creating new ones. But the current wave of change may be the most rapid  and unpredictable in history. How to prepare people to earn a livelihood in  the digital age – and how to protect those struggling to do so – is a critical  question for digital cooperation for governments and other stakeholders who  aim to reduce inequality and achieve the SDGs.  At this stage, there appears to be limited value in attempting to predict  whether robots and artificial intelligence will create more jobs than they  eliminate, although technology historically has been a net job creator.68   Many studies attempt to predict the impact on the jobs market but there is "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 13far from being a consensus.69 The only certainty is that workers have entered  a period of vast and growing uncertainty – and that this necessitates new  mechanisms of cooperation.  REFORMING EDUCATION SYSTEMS AND  SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING Modern schools were developed in response to the industrial revolution, and  they may ultimately need fundamental reform to be fit for the digital age –  but it is currently difficult to see more than the broad contours of the changes  that are likely to be needed.  Countries are still in early stages of learning how to use digital tools  in education and how to prepare students for digital economies and  societies. These will be ongoing challenges for governments and  other stakeholders. Some countries are now exposing even very  young children to science and robotics. Alongside such broader digital  literacy efforts, it may be even more important to focus from an early  age on developing children’s “soft skills”, such as social and emotional  intelligence, creativity, collaboration and critical thinking. One widely  referenced study concludes that occupations requiring such soft skills  are less likely to be automated.70     Teaching about specific technologies should always be based on strong  foundational knowledge in science and math, as this is less likely to  become obsolete. At a degree level, science, technology, engineering and  mathematics (STEM) curricula need to borrow from the humanities and  social sciences, and vice versa: STEM students need to be encouraged to  think about the ethical and social implications of their disciplines, while  humanities and social science students need a basic understanding of data  science.71 More informal approaches to learning may be needed to prepare  students for working in cross-disciplinary teams, and where such informal  approaches already exist in the developing world they should be fully  appreciated for their value.  As the boundaries increasingly blur between ‘work’ and ‘learning’, the need  to enable and incentivise lifelong learning was emphasised in many of the  written contributions the Panel received.   Lifelong learning should be affordable, portable and accessible to all.  Responsibility for lifelong learning should be shared between workers  themselves, governments, education institutions, the informal sector  and industry: digital cooperation mechanisms should bring these groups  together for regular debates on what skills are required and how training can  be delivered. Workers should have flexibility to explore how best to opt into  or design their own approach to lifelong learning. There are emerging examples of government efforts to use social security  systems and public-private partnerships to incentivise and empower workers  to learn new skills and plan for a changing labour market. Among those drawn to  the Panel’s attention were efforts by the International Trade Union Confederation  in Ghana and Rwanda,72 France’s Compte Personnel de Formation, Scotland’s  Individual Training Account, Finland’s transformation of work and the labour  market sub-group under its national AI programme, and Singapore’s Skills  Framework for Information and Communication Technology (ICT).    However, reskilling cannot be the only answer to inequality in the labour  market – especially as the workers most able to learn new skills will be those  who start with the advantage of comparatively higher levels of education.73  PROTECTING WORKERS, NOT JOBS New business models are fuelling the rise of an informal or “gig” economy, in  which workers typically have flexibility but not job or income security.74 In  industrialised countries, as more and more people work unpredictable hours  as freelancers, independent contractors, agency workers or workers on  internet platforms, there is an urgent need to rethink labour codes developed  decades ago when factory jobs were the norm.75    Promising initiatives include Germany’s Crowdsourcing Code of Conduct,  which sets out guidelines on fair payment, reasonable timing and data  protection for internet platform workers, and employs an ombudsman to  mediate disputes; and Belgium’s Titre-Services and France’s Chèque Emploi  Service Universel, which offer tax incentives for people engaging casual  workers to participate in a voucher scheme that enables the workers to qualify  for formal labour rights. There are also examples of digital technologies  enabling new ways for workers to engage in collective bargaining.76   While the gig economy tends to make work less formal in industrialised  countries, in the developing world the majority of people have long worked in  the informal sector.77 For these workers, gig economy arrangements may be  more formal and transparent, and – with appropriate cooperation measures  with technology firms – easier for governments to oversee.78 The challenge,  as with industrialised countries, is to uphold labour rights while still allowing  flexibility and innovation.  In all national contexts, protecting workers and promoting job creation in the  digital age will require smart regulations and investments, and policies on  taxation and social protection policies which support workers as they seek  to transition to new opportunities.  2.3 REGIONAL AND GLOBAL ECONOMIC  POLICY COOPERATION Taxation, trade, consumer protection and competition are among the areas  of economic policy that require new thinking in the digital age: they are the  ‘guard rails’ of the digital economy. Increased cooperation could lead to  effective national approaches and experience informing regional and global  multilateral cooperation arrangements. Taxation, trade, consumer protection  and competition are among the areas of  economic policy that require new thinking  in the digital age: they are the ‘guard  rails’ of the digital economy. Increased  cooperation could lead to effective  national approaches and experience  informing regional and global multilateral  cooperation arrangements. Currently, however, there is a lack of regional and global standards in these  areas, and multilateral cooperation is generally not working well. This may  inflict far higher costs than is widely recognised. To take one relatively simple "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 14example, regional and global standards in areas such as interoperability  of mobile money systems and best practices for digital ID would have  considerable benefits. To discourage misuse, such standards and practices  would also need to include clear accountability. International trade rules need to be updated for the digital age. Technologies  and trade have changed dramatically since 1998, for example, when the World  Trade Organisation (WTO) last brokered an agreement on e-commerce.79 In  January 2019, 76 WTO member states announced the initiation of plurilateral  negotiations on trade-related aspects of e-commerce.80 Any agreement will  need to address concerns of a diverse range of countries, including lowerincome countries in which the e-commerce sector is less developed.81    Consumer protection is also relevant to discussions on international  e-commerce. When consumers buy goods and services locally, they need  to consider only local consumer protection. As an increasing number of  e-commerce transactions take place across international borders, consumer  protection based on agreed principles – such as OECD guidelines – could  promote greater trust and better protect citizen interest. It has likewise proved difficult so far to establish international standards  or rules for the exchange of data. Trade rules were developed for goods and  services that are produced and then consumed. By contrast, data which is  “produced” by individuals and devices is not “consumed”, but rather can be  used repeatedly, and gains value when combined with other data.82    Some argue that restrictions on data flows should be treated like any other  trade barrier and generally minimised.83 However, views differ sharply,  and decisions on national legislation are complicated by concerns about  privacy and security – discussed in the next chapter. Countries that require  companies to store and process data within their national borders argue that  it promotes local innovation and investment in technology infrastructure  and makes it easier to tax global corporations.84 Others argue against such  approaches on the basis that they are protectionist or represent an effort to  obtain access to the data.  There is growing recognition that taxation is an area where digital technology  has moved faster than policy frameworks. In particular, technology  firms may operate business models – such as multi-sided platforms or  “freemium” models – which offer free services to some individual users and  earn revenue from other users, merchants or advertisers.85 A company may  provide services to millions of people in a country without establishing a  legal entity or paying tax there. This has become a source of growing popular  resentment.86   Where possible, new regulatory  approaches should be tested on a small  scale before being rolled out widely  – through, for example, pilot zones,  regulatory sandboxes or trial periods. International digital cooperation could assist countries to develop  appropriate tax policies. The G20 and OECD’s Base Erosion and Profit Shifting  project is currently seeking consensus on issues such as how a global  company’s tax receipts should be allocated to different jurisdictions based  on its business activities.87 An agreement in this area could offer countries a source of revenue that they could, for example, use to invest in human  capital or lower the tax burden on small businesses.   Some countries are now taking unilateral action. Countries such as Italy,  France and the United Kingdom (UK) have announced the intent to impose  taxes on digital sales rather than profits, at least on an interim basis.88  Other countries, such as Thailand, have amended tax rules relating to  offshore digital services.89 The lack of cooperation and coordination among  different regulators is creating a patchwork of different national rules and  regulations which makes trade and e-commerce more difficult. Ensuring that  such emerging tax policies do not have unintended consequences on small  enterprises or poor populations deserves special attention.  An international perspective is also needed to tackle concerns about  competition, which have grown as large firms have established leading  positions in many digital services. This is due in part to network effects: the  more users a platform already has, the more attractive it becomes for new  users and advertisers. Recent discussions have proposed three main approaches.90 First,  a relatively laissez-faire approach that favours self-regulation or  minimal regulation. Proponents argue that government regulation is  often poorly conceived and counterproductive, harming innovation  and economic dynamism. Critics counter that an overly hands-off  approach has led to a concentration of market power in large firms and  abuses of privacy that have sparked public and government concern.  A second approach calls for more active state intervention to set  rules for digital companies. Experience in industrial policy shows  that such an approach can either help or hinder depending on many  factors, including regulators’ willingness and ability to engage varied  stakeholders in a smart discourse to balance competing interests  effectively.91   A third approach suggests regulating digital businesses as public  utilities, analogous to railroads or electricity companies. The analogy  is not an exact one, however, as physical infrastructure is easier to  segment and harder to replicate than digital infrastructure and lends  itself more easily to hosting competition among service providers.  There is also dispute about how contestable are digital markets – that  is, how vulnerable are the leading firms to new competitors. Moreover,  traditional competition law operates far more slowly than changes in  technology. Finding the right approach in these areas will require not only different  countries to work together, but also regulators in different government  agencies. Models for how agencies can come together for peer-topeer information sharing include the International Conference of Data  Protection & Privacy Commissioners and the International Competition  Network.92   Alongside existing models, new models of governance and cooperation may  be needed. They will need to be multi-stakeholder, including the private  sector, civil society and users. Their debates should be transparent and open  to citizens, as modelled by Mexico’s National Institute for Transparency,  Access to Information and Personal Data Protection.93   Where possible, new regulatory approaches should be tested on a small  scale before being rolled out widely – through, for example, pilot zones, "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 15regulatory sandboxes or trial periods. We stress the overall need for a  “systems” approach to cooperation and regulation that is multi-stakeholder,  adaptive, agile and inclusive in Recommendation 5B.    However, regulators need to have sufficient resources and expertise to  engage in such an approach – and the Panel’s consultations highlighted  concern that many regulators and legislators have insufficient understanding  of complex digital issues to develop and implement policies, engage with  companies developing technologies and explain issues to the public.94 This  increases the risk of regulations having unintended consequences.  There are several existing examples of initiatives to develop the capacity and  understanding of public officials, from countries such as Israel,95 Singapore96  and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).97  But much more could be done, and  the Panel’s Recommendation 2 envisages “digital help desks” which would  broaden opportunities for officials and regulators to develop the skills  needed for the smart governance that will be required to create inclusive and  positive outcomes for all.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 16The ultimate purpose of digital technology should always be to improve  human welfare. Beyond the socio-economic aspects discussed in  the previous chapter, digital technologies have proved that they can  connect individuals across cultural and geographic barriers, increasing  understanding and potentially helping societies to become more peaceful  and cohesive.  However, this is only part of the story. There are also many examples of  digital technologies being used to violate rights, undermine privacy, polarise  societies and incite violence. The questions raised are new, complex and pressing. What are the  responsibilities of social media companies, governments and individual  users? Who is accountable when data can move across the world in an  instant? How can varied stakeholders, in nations with diverse cultural and  historical traditions, cooperate to ensure that digital technologies do not  weaken human rights but strengthen them?  3.1 HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMAN  AGENCY Many of the most important documents that codify human rights were  written before the age of digital interdependence. They include the  Universal Declaration on Human Rights; the International Covenant on  Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on  Civil and Political Rights; the Convention on the Elimination of all forms  of Discrimination against Women; and the Convention on the Rights of  the Child.  The rights these treaties and conventions codify apply in full in the digital  age – and often with fresh urgency.  Digital technologies are widely used to advocate for, defend and exercise  human rights – but also to violate them. Social media, for example, has  provided powerful new ways to exercise the rights to free expression and  association, and to document rights violations. It is also used to violate rights  by spreading lies that incite hatred and foment violence, often at terrible  speed and with the cloak of anonymity.  The most outrageous cases make the headlines. The live streaming of  mass shootings in New Zealand.98 Incitement of violence against an  ethnic minority in Myanmar.99 The #gamergate scandal, in which women  working in video games were threatened with rape.100 The suicides of a  British teenager who had viewed self-harm content on social media101   and an Indian man bullied after posting videos of himself dressed as a  woman.102  But these are manifestations of a problem that runs wide and deep: one  survey of UK adult internet users found that 40 percent of 16-24 year-olds  have reported some form of harmful online content, with examples ranging  from racism to harassment and child abuse.103 Children are at particular risk:  almost a third of under-18s report having recently been exposed to “violent  or hateful contact or behaviour online”.104 Elderly people are also more prone  to online fraud and misinformation.  Governments have increasingly sought to cut off social media in febrile  situations – such as after a terrorist attack – when the risks of rapidly  spreading misinformation are especially high. But denying access to the  internet can also be part of a sustained government policy that itself violates  citizens’ rights, including by depriving people of access to information.  Across the globe, governments directed 188 separate internet shutdowns in  2018, up from 108 in 2017 .105   PROTECTING HUMAN RIGHTS IN THE DIGITAL AGE Universal human rights apply equally online as offline – freedom of  expression and assembly, for example, are no less important in cyberspace  than in the town square. That said, in many cases it is far from obvious how  human rights laws and treaties drafted in a pre-digital era should be applied  in the digital age.  There is an urgent need to examine how  time-honoured human rights frameworks  and conventions – and the obligations that  flow from those commitments – can guide  actions and policies relating to digital  cooperation and digital technology. There is an urgent need to examine how time-honoured human rights  frameworks and conventions – and the obligations that flow from those  commitments – can guide actions and policies relating to digital cooperation  and digital technology. The Panel’s Recommendation 3A urges the UN  Secretary-General to begin a process that invites views from all stakeholders  on how human rights can be meaningfully applied to ensure that no gaps in  protection are caused by new and emerging digital technologies.  Such a process could draw inspiration from many recent national and global  efforts to apply human rights for the digital age.106 Illustrative examples  include: 3. Individuals, Societies and   Digital Technologies "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 17• India’s Supreme Court has issued a judgement defining what the right to   privacy means in the digital context.107   • Nigeria’s draft Digital Rights and Freedom Bill tries to apply international   human rights law to national digital realities.108  • The Global Compact and UNICEF have developed guidance on how   businesses should approach children’s rights in the digital age.109   • UNESCO has used its Rights, Openness, Access and Multi-stakeholder   governance (ROAM) framework to discuss AI’s implications for rights   including freedom of expression, privacy, equality and participation in   public life.110   • The Council of Europe has developed recommendations and guidelines,   and the European Court of Human Rights has produced case law,   interpreting the European Convention on Human Rights in the digital realm.  111 We must collectively ensure that advances in technology are not used to  erode human rights or avoid accountability. Human rights defenders should  not be targeted for their use of digital media.112 International mechanisms  for human rights reporting by states should better incorporate the digital  dimension.    In the digital age, the role of the private sector in human rights is becoming  increasingly pronounced. As digital technologies and digital services reach  scale so quickly, decisions taken by private companies are increasingly  affecting millions of people across national borders.  The roles of government and business are described in the 2011 UN Guiding  Principles on Business and Human Rights. Though not binding, they were  unanimously endorsed by the Human Rights Council and the UN General  Assembly. They affirm that while states have the duty to protect rights and  provide remedies, businesses also have a responsibility to respect human  rights, evaluate risk and assess the human rights impact of their actions.113   There is now a critical need for clearer guidance about what should be  expected on human rights from private companies as they develop and  deploy digital technologies. The need is especially pressing for social media  companies, which is why our Recommendation 3B calls for them to put in  place procedures, staff and better ways of working with civil society and  human rights defenders to prevent or quickly redress violations. As any new technology is developed, we  should ask how it might inadvertently  create new ways of violating rights –  especially of people who are already often  marginalised or discriminated against. We heard from one interviewee that companies can struggle to understand  local context quickly enough to respond effectively in fast-developing  conflict situations and may welcome UN or other expert insight in helping  them assess concerns being raised by local actors. One potential venue for  information sharing is the UN Forum on Business and Human Rights, through  which the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva hosts  regular discussions among the private sector and civil society.114    Civil society organisations would like to go beyond information sharing and  use such forums to identify patterns of violations and hold the private sector to account.115 Governments also are becoming less willing to accept a handsoff regulatory approach: in the UK, for example, legislators are exploring how  existing legal principles such as “duty of care” could be applied to social  media firms.116 As any new technology is developed, we should ask how it might  inadvertently create new ways of violating rights – especially of people  who are already often marginalised or discriminated against. Women, for  example, experience higher levels of online harassment than men.117 The  development of personal care robots is raising questions about the rights of  elderly people to dignity, privacy and agency.118 The rights of children need especially acute attention. Children go online at  ever younger ages, and under-18s make up one-third of all internet users.119   They are most vulnerable to online bullying and sexual exploitation. Digital  technologies should promote the best interests of children and respect their  agency to articulate their needs, in accordance with the Convention on the  Rights of the Child.  Online services and apps used by children should be subject to strict design  and data consent standards. Notable examples include the American  Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule of 2013 and the draft Age  Appropriate Design Code announced by the UK Information Commissioner  in 2019, which defines standards for apps, games and many other digital  services even if they are not intended for children.120  HUMAN DIGNITY, AGENCY AND CHOICE We are delegating more and more decisions to intelligent systems, from  how to get to work to what to eat for dinner.121 This can improve our lives, by  freeing up time for activities we find more important. But it is also forcing us  to rethink our understandings of human dignity and agency, as algorithms  are increasingly sophisticated at manipulating our choices – for example, to  keep our attention glued to a screen.122 It is also becoming apparent that ‘intelligent’ systems can reinforce  discrimination. Many algorithms have been shown to reflect the biases of  their creators.123 This is just one reason why employment in the technology  sector needs to be more diverse – as noted in Recommendation 1C, which  calls for improving gender equality.124 Gaps in the data on which algorithms  are trained can likewise automate existing patterns of discrimination, as  machine learning systems are only as good as the data that is fed to them.  Often the discrimination is too subtle to notice, but the real-life consequences  can be profound when AI systems are used to make decisions such as who  is eligible for home loans or public services such as health care.125 The harm  caused can be complicated to redress.126 A growing number of initiatives,  such as the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)’s Global  Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems, are seeking to  define how developers of artificial intelligence should address these and  similar problems.127 Other initiatives are looking at questions of human responsibility and legal  accountability – a complex and rapidly-changing area.128 Legal systems  assume that decisions can be traced back to people. Autonomous intelligent  systems raise the danger that humans could evade responsibility for  decisions made or actions taken by technology they designed, trained,  adapted or deployed.129 In any given case, legal liability might ultimately rest  with the people who developed the technology, the people who chose the "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 18data on which to train the technology, and/or the people who chose to deploy  the technology in a given situation.  These questions come into sharpest focus with lethal autonomous weapons  systems – machines that can autonomously select targets and kill. UN  Secretary-General António Guterres has called for a ban on machines with  the power and discretion to take lives without human involvement, a position  which this Panel supports. 130 Gaps in the data on which algorithms are  trained can likewise automate existing  patterns of discrimination, as machine  learning systems are only as good as the  data that is fed to them. The Panel supports, as stated in Recommendation 3C, the emerging global  consensus that autonomous intelligent systems be designed so that their  decisions can be explained, and humans remain accountable. These systems  demand the highest standards of ethics and engineering. They should be used  with extreme caution to make decisions affecting people’s social or economic  opportunities or rights, and individuals should have meaningful opportunity to  appeal. Life and death decisions should not be delegated to machines. THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY The right to privacy131 has become particularly contentious as digital  technologies have given governments and private companies vast new  possibilities for surveillance, tracking and monitoring, some of which are  invasive of privacy.132  As with so many areas of digital technology, there  needs to be a society-wide conversation, based on informed consent,  about the boundaries and norms for such uses of digital technology and AI.  Surveillance, tracking or monitoring by governments or businesses should  not violate international human rights law. It is helpful to articulate what we mean by “privacy” and “security”. We  define “privacy” as being about an individual’s right to decide who is  allowed to see and use their personal information.  We define “security”  as being about protecting data, on servers and in communication via  digital networks. Notions and expectations of privacy also differ across cultures and societies.  How should an individual’s right to privacy be balanced against the interest of  businesses in accessing data to improve services and government interest  in accessing data for legitimate public purposes related to law enforcement  and national security?133   Societies around the world debate these questions heatedly when hard  cases come to light, such as Apple’s 2016 refusal of the United States Federal  Bureau of Investigation (FBI)’s request to assist in unlocking an iPhone of  the suspect in a shooting case.134 Different governments are taking different  approaches: some are forcing technology companies to provide technical  means of access, sometimes referred to as “backdoors”, so the state can  access personal data.135 Complications arise when data is located in another country: in 2013,  Microsoft refused an FBI request to provide a suspect’s emails that were  stored on a server in Ireland. The United States of America (USA) has since  passed a law obliging American companies to comply with warrants to  provide data of American citizens even if it is stored abroad.136 It enables  other governments to separately negotiate agreements to access their  citizens’ data stored by American companies in the USA.  There currently seems to be little alternative to handling cross-border law  enforcement requests through a complex and slow-moving patchwork of  bilateral agreements – the attitudes of people and governments around  the world differ widely, and the decision-making role of global technology  companies is evolving. Nonetheless, it is possible that regional and  multilateral arrangements could develop over time. For individuals, what companies can do with their personal data is not just  a question of legality but practical understanding – to manage permissions  for every single organisation we interact with would be incredibly time  consuming and confusing. How to give people greater meaningful control  over their personal data is an important question for digital cooperation.  Alongside the right to privacy is the important question of who realises the  economic value that can be derived from personal data. Consumers typically  have little awareness of how their personal information is sold or otherwise  used to generate economic benefit.  There are emerging ideas to make data transactions more explicit and share  the value extracted from personal data with the individuals who provide it.  These could include business models which give users greater privacy by  default: promising examples include the web browser Brave and the search  engine DuckDuckGo.137 They could include new legal structures: the UK138  and India139 are among countries exploring the idea of a third-party ‘data  fiduciary’ who users can authorise to manage their personal data on their  behalf.  3.2 TRUST AND SOCIAL COHESION The world is suffering from a “trust deficit disorder”, in the words of the UN  Secretary-General addressing the UN General Assembly in 2018.140 Trust  among nations and in multilateral processes has weakened as states focus  more on strategic competition than common interests and behave more  aggressively. Building trust, and underpinning it with clear and agreed  standards, is central to the success of digital cooperation.  Digital technologies have enabled some new interactions that promote trust,  notably by verifying people’s identities and allowing others to rate them.141   Although not reliable in all instances, such systems have enabled many  entrepreneurs on e-commerce platforms to win the trust of consumers, and  given many people on sharing platforms the confidence to invite strangers  into their cars or homes. In other ways, digital technologies are eroding trust. Lies can now spread  more easily, including through algorithms which generate and promote  misinformation, sowing discord and undermining confidence in political  processes.142 The use of artificial intelligence to produce “deep fakes” –  audio and visual content that convincingly mimics real humans – further  complicates the task of telling truth from misinformation.143"
The Age of Digital Interdependence 19Violations of privacy and security are undermining people’s trust in  governments and companies. Trust between states is challenged by new  ways to conduct espionage, manipulate public opinion and infiltrate critical  infrastructure. While academia has traditionally nurtured international  cooperation in artificial intelligence, governments are incentivised to  secrecy by awareness that future breakthroughs could dramatically shift  the balance of power.144 The trust deficit might in part be tackled by new technologies, such as training  algorithms to identify and take down misinformation. But such solutions will pose  their own issues: could we trust the accuracy and impartiality of the algorithms?  Ultimately, trust needs to be built through clear standards and agreements  based on mutual self-interest and values and with wide participation among all  stakeholders, and mechanisms to impose costs for violations. How can trust be promoted in the digital age? The problem of trust came up repeatedly in written contributions to  the Panel. Microsoft’s contribution stressed that an atmosphere of  trust incentivises the invention of inclusive new technologies. As  Latin American human rights group Derechos Digitales put it, “all  participants in processes of digital cooperation must be able to share  and work together freely, confident in the reliability and honesty of  their counterparts”. But how can trust be promoted? We received a  large number of ideas:  Articulating values and principles that govern technology  development and use. Being transparent about decision-making that  impacts other stakeholders, known vulnerabilities in software, and  data breaches. Governments inviting participation from companies  and civil society in discussions on regulation. Making real and visible  efforts to obtain consent and protect data, including “security-bydesign” and “privacy-by-design” initiatives.149   Accepting oversight from a trusted third-party: for the media, this  could be an organisation that fact-checks sources; for technology  companies, this could be external audits of design, deployment and  internal audit processes; for governments, this could be reviews by  human rights forums.  Understanding the incentive structures that erode trust, and finding  ways to change them: for example, requiring or pressuring social  media firms to refuse to run adverts which contain disinformation,  de-monetise content that contains disinformation, and clearly label  sponsors of political adverts.150   Finally, digital cooperation itself can be a source of trust. In the Cold  War, small pools of shared interest – non-proliferation or regional  stability – allowed competitors to work together and paved the way  for transparency and confidence-building measures that helped build  a modicum of trust.151 Analogously, getting multiple stakeholders  into a habit of cooperating on issues such as standard-setting and  interoperability, addressing risks and social harm and collaborative  application of digital technologies to achieve the SDGs, could allow  trust to be built up gradually. All citizens can play a role in building societal resilience against the misuse  of digital technology. We all need to deepen our understanding of the political, social, cultural and economic impacts of digital technologies and  what it means to use them responsibly. We encourage nations to consider  how educational systems can train students to thoughtfully consider the  sources and credibility of information.  All citizens can play a role in building  societal resilience against the misuse of  digital technology. We all need to deepen  our understanding of the political, social,  cultural and economic impacts of digital  technologies and what it means to use  them responsibly. There are many encouraging instances of digital cooperation being used to  build individual capacities that will collectively make it harder for irresponsible  use of digital technologies to erode societal trust.145 Examples drawn to the  Panel’s attention by written submissions and interviews include: • The 5Rights Foundation and British Telecom developed an initiative to   help children understand how the apps and games they use make   money, including techniques to keep their attention for longer.146   • The Cisco Networking Academy and United Nations Volunteers are   training youth in Asia and Latin America to explore how digital   technologies can enable them to become agents of social change in their   communities.147  • The Digital Empowerment Foundation is working in India with WhatsApp   and community leaders to stop the spread of misinformation on social media.148 3.3 SECURITY Global security and stability are increasingly dependent on digital security  and stability. The scope of threats is growing. Cyber capabilities are  developing, becoming more targeted, more impactful on physical systems  and more insidious at undermining societal trust. “Cyber attacks” and “massive data fraud and threat” have ranked for two years  in a row among the top five global risks listed by the World Economic Forum  (WEF).152 More than 80% of the experts consulted in the WEF’s latest annual  survey expected the risks of “cyber-attacks: theft of data/money” and “cyberattacks: disruption of operations and infrastructure” to increase yearly.153   Three recent examples illustrate the concern. In 2016, hackers stole $81  million from the Bangladesh Central Bank by manipulating the SWIFT  global payments network.154 In 2017 , malware called “NotPetya” caused  widespread havoc – shipping firm Maersk alone lost an estimated $250  million.155 In 2018, by one estimate, cybercriminals stole $1.5 trillion – an  amount comparable to the national income of Spain.156 Accurate figures are hard to come by as victims may prefer to keep quiet. But  often it is only publicity about a major incident that prompts the necessary  investments in security. Short-term incentives generally prioritise launching  new products over making systems more robust.157   The range of targets for cyber-attacks is increasing quickly. New internet  users typically have low awareness of digital hygiene.158 Already over half "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 20of attacks are directed at “things” on the Internet of Things, which connects  everything from smart TVs to baby monitors to thermostats.159 Fast 5G  networks will further integrate the internet with physical infrastructure,  likely creating new vulnerabilities.160 The potential for cyber-attacks to take down critical infrastructure has  been clear since Stuxnet was found to have penetrated an Iranian nuclear  facility in 2010.161 More recently concerns have widened to the potential  risks and impact of misinformation campaigns and online efforts by foreign  governments to influence democratic elections, including the 2016 Brexit  vote and the American presidential election.162   Other existing initiatives on digital security The Paris Call for Trust and Security in Cyberspace  is a multistakeholder initiative launched in November 2018 and joined by 65  countries, 334 companies – including Microsoft, Facebook, Google  and IBM – and 138 universities and non-profit organisations. It calls for  measures including coordinated disclosure of technical vulnerabilities.  Many leading technology powers, such as the USA, Russia, China, Israel  and India – have not signed up.173  The Global Commission on Stability in Cyberspace , an independent  multi-stakeholder platform, is developing proposals for norms and  policies to enhance international security and stability in cyberspace.  The commission has introduced a series of norms, including calls for  agreement not to attack critical infrastructure and non-interference  in elections, and is currently discussing accountability and the future  of cybersecurity. The Global Conference on Cyberspace , also known as the ‘London  Process’, are ad hoc multi-stakeholder conferences held so far in  London (2011), Budapest (2012), Seoul (2013), The Hague (2015) and  New Delhi (2017). The Global Forum on Cyber Expertise, established  after the 2015 Conference, is a platform for identifying best practices  and providing support to states, the private sector and organisations  in developing cybersecurity frameworks, policies and skills.  The Geneva Dialogue on Responsible Behaviour in Cyberspace  provides  another forum for multi-stakeholder consultation. The Cybersecurity Tech Accord  and the Charter of Trust  are examples  of industry-led voluntary initiatives to identify guiding principles for  trust and security, strengthen security of supply chains and improve  training of employees in cybersecurity.174  Compared to physical attacks, it can be much harder to prove from  which jurisdiction a cyber-attack originated. This makes it difficult  to attribute responsibility or use mechanisms to cooperate on law  enforcement.163   Perceptions of digital vulnerability and unfair cyber advantage are  contributing to trade, investment and strategic tensions.164 Numerous  countries have set up cyber commands within their militaries.165 Nearly 60  states are known to be pursuing offensive capabilities.166 This increases the  risks for all as cyber weapons, once released, can be used to attack others –  including the original developer of the weapon.167 As artificial intelligence advances, the tactics and tools of cyber-attacks will  become more sophisticated and difficult to predict – including more able to  pursue highly customised objectives, and to adapt in real time.168  Many governments and companies are aware of the need to strengthen  digital cooperation by agreeing on and implementing international norms for  responsible behaviour, and important progress has been made especially in  meetings of groups of governmental experts at the UN.169   The UN Groups of Governmental Experts (GGE) on Developments in the  Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International  Security have been set up by resolutions of the UN General Assembly at  regular intervals since 1998. Decisions by the GGE are made on the basis  of consensus, including the decision on the final report.170 The 2013 GGE  on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in  the Context of International Security agreed in its report that international  law applies to cyberspace (see text box).171 This view was reaffirmed by  the subsequent 2015 GGE, which also proposed eleven voluntary and  non-binding norms for states.172 The UN General Assembly welcomed the  2015 report and called on member states to be guided by it in their use of  information and communications technologies. This marks an important  step forward in building cooperation and agreement in this increasingly  salient arena.. DIGITAL COOPERATION ON CYBERSECURITY The pace of cyber-attacks is quickening. Currently fragmented efforts need  rapidly to coalesce into a comprehensive set of common principles to align  action and facilitate cooperation that raises the costs for malicious actors.175   Private sector involvement is especially important to evolving a common  approach to tracing cyber-attacks: assessing evidence, context, attenuating  circumstances and damage. We are encouraged that the 2019 UN GGE176 and  the new Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG)177 which deal with behaviour of  states and international law, while primarily a forum for inter-governmental  consultations, do provide for consultations with stakeholders other than  governments, mainly regional organisations.  In our Recommendation 4, we call for a multi-stakeholder Global Commitment  on Digital Trust and Security to bolster these existing efforts. It could provide  support in the implementation of agreed norms, rules and principles of  responsible behaviour and present a shared vision on digital trust and security.  It could also propose priorities for further action on capacity development for  governments and other stakeholders and international cooperation.  The Global Commitment should coordinate with ongoing and emerging  efforts to implement norms in practice by assisting victims of cyber-attacks  and assessing impact. It may not yet be feasible to envisage a single global  forum to house such capabilities, but there would be value in strengthening  cooperation among existing initiatives.  Another priority should be to deepen cooperation and information sharing  among the experts who comprise national governments’ Computer  Emergency Response Teams (CERTs). Examples to build on here include  the Oman-ITU Arab Regional Cybersecurity Centre for 22 Arab League  countries,178 the EU’s Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT)s  Network,179 and Israel’s Cyber Net, in which public and private teams work  together. Collaborative platforms hosted by neutral third parties such as the  Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST) can help build trust  and the exchange of best practices and tools.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 21The pace of cyber-attacks is quickening.  Currently fragmented efforts need rapidly  to coalesce into a comprehensive set of  common principles to align action and  facilitate cooperation that raises the  costs for malicious actors. Digital cooperation among the private sector, governments and international  organisations should seek to improve transparency and quality in the  development of software, components and devices.180 While many best  practices and standards exist, they often address only narrow parts of a  vast and diverse universe that ranges from talking toys to industrial control  systems.181 Gaps exist in awareness and application. Beyond encouraging  a broader focus on security among developers, digital cooperation  should address the critical need to train more experts specifically in  cybersecurity:182 by one estimate, the shortfall will be 3.5 million by 2021.183"
The Age of Digital Interdependence 22No single approach to digital cooperation can address the diverse spectrum  of issues raised in this report – and as technologies evolve, so will the  issues, and the most effective ways to cooperate. We should approach digital  cooperation using all available tools, making dynamic choices about the best  approach based on specific circumstances. In some cases, cooperation may  be initiated and led by the private sector or civil society, and in some cases by  governments or international organisations.184  Most current mechanisms of digital  cooperation are primarily local,  national or regional. However, digital  interdependence also necessitates that  we strengthen global digital cooperation  mechanisms to address challenges and  provide opportunities for all.  Most current mechanisms of digital cooperation are primarily local, national  or regional. However, digital interdependence also necessitates that we  strengthen global digital cooperation mechanisms to address challenges and  provide opportunities for all.   This chapter identifies gaps and challenges in current arrangements for global  digital cooperation and summarises the functions any future cooperation  architecture could perform and what principles could underpin them. It  then outlines three possible options for digital cooperation architectures  and concludes with a discussion of the role the United Nations can play.  There was not unanimity of opinion among the Panel members about the  shape, function and operations of these different models. Instead, they are  presented as useful alternatives to explore in the spirit of digital cooperation  and as an input for the broad consultations we call for in Recommendation 5A. Ultimately, success of any proposed mechanisms and architecture will  depend on the spirit in which they are developed and implemented. All  governments, the private sector and civil society organisations need to  recognise how much they stand to gain from a spirit of collaboration to drive  progress toward the achievement of the SDGs and to raise the costs of using  digital technologies irresponsibly. The alternative is further erosion of the  trust and stability we need to build an inclusive and prosperous digital future. 4.1 CHALLENGES AND GAPS  The international community is not starting from scratch. It can build on  established mechanisms for digital cooperation involving governments, technical bodies, civil society and other organisations. Some are based in  national and international law,185 others in “soft law” – norms, guidelines,  codes of conduct and other self-regulatory measures adopted by business  and tech communities.186 Some are loosely organised, others highly  institutionalised.187 Some focus on setting agendas and standards, others  on monitoring and coordination.188 Many could evolve to become better fit for  purpose. The need for better digital cooperation is not so much with managing the  technical nuts and bolts of how technologies function, as mechanisms  here are generally well-established, but with the unprecedented economic,  societal and ethical challenges they cause. How to tell, in context, when  conversations on social media cross the line into inciting violence? How  to limit the use of cyber weapons possessed not only by states but nonstate actors and individuals?189 How to adapt trade systems designed for a  different era to the newly emerging forms of online commerce?  The 2003 and 2005 World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS)  established the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) as a platform for multistakeholder dialogue.190 Global, national and regional IGF meetings have  contributed to many important digital debates. But the IGF, in its current form,  has limitations in addressing challenges that are now emerging from new  digital technologies. The need for strengthened cooperation mechanisms has been raised  many times in recent years by broad initiatives – such as the NetMundial  Conference,191 the Global Commission on Internet Governance192 and Web  Foundation’s Contract for the Web193 – and more narrowly focused efforts  such as the Broadband Commission, the Alliance for Affordable Internet, the  Internet & Jurisdiction Policy Network, the Global Commission on the Stability  of Cyberspace, the Charter of Trust, Smart Africa, and the International Panel  on AI recently announced by Canada and France.194  In our consultations, we heard a great deal of dissatisfaction with existing  digital cooperation arrangements: a desire for more tangible outcomes,  more active participation by governments and the private sector, more  inclusive processes and better follow-up. Overall, systems need to become  more holistic, multi-disciplinary, multi-stakeholder, agile and able to convert  rhetoric into practice. We have identified six main gaps: First, despite their growing impact on society, digital technology and digital  cooperation issues remain relatively low on many national, regional and  global political agendas. Only recently have forums such as the G20 started  regularly to address the digital economy.195 In 2018, the UN SecretaryGeneral for the first time delivered an opening statement in person at the IGF  in Paris.196 4. Mechanisms for  Global Digital Cooperation "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 23Second, digital cooperation arrangements such as technical bodies and  standard-setting organisations are often not inclusive enough of small and  developing countries, indigenous communities, women, young and elderly  people and those with disabilities. Even if they are invited to the table, such  groups may lack the capacity to participate effectively and meaningfully.197     Third, there is considerable overlap among the large number of mechanisms  covering digital policy issues. As a result, the digital cooperation architecture  has become highly complex but not necessarily effective. There is no simple  entry point. This makes it especially hard for small enterprises, marginalised  groups, developing countries and other stakeholders with limited budgets  and expertise to make their voices heard.198 Fourth, digital technologies increasingly cut across areas in which policies  are shaped by separate institutions. For example, one body may look at data  issues from the perspective of standardisation, while another considers trade,  and still another regulates to protect human rights.199 Many international  organisations are trying to adjust their traditional policy work to reflect the  realities of the digital transformation, but do not yet have enough expertise  and experience to have well-defined roles in addressing new digital issues. At  a minimum there needs to be better communication across different bodies  to shape awareness. Ideally, effective cooperation should create synergies.  Fifth, there is a lack of reliable data, metrics and evidence on which to base  practical policy interventions. For example, the annual cost of cybercrime to  the global economy is variously estimated at anything from $600 billion200  to $6 trillion.201 Estimates of the value of the AI market in 2025 range from  $60 billion202 to $17 trillion.203 The problem is most acute in developing  countries, where resources to collect evidence are scarce and data collection  is generally uneven. Establishing a knowledge repository on digital policy,  with definitions of terms and concepts, would also increase clarity in policy  discussions and support consistency of measurement of digital inclusion, as  we have noted in our Recommendation 1D. Sixth, lack of trust among governments, civil society and the private  sector – and sometimes a lack of humility and understanding of different  perspectives – can make it more difficult to establish the collaborative  multi-stakeholder approach needed to develop effective cooperation  mechanisms.  Inter-governmental work must be balanced with work involving broader  stakeholders. Multi-stakeholder and multilateral approaches can and do  co-exist. The challenge is to evolve ways of using each to reinforce the  effectiveness of the other. VALUES AND PRINCIPLES  As noted in the discussion of values in Chapter 1, we believe global digital  cooperation should be: inclusive; respectful; human-centred; conducive to  human flourishing; transparent; collaborative; accessible; sustainable and  harmonious. Shared values become even more important during periods  of rapid change, limited information and unpredictability, as with current  discussions of cooperation relating to artificial intelligence.  It would be useful for the private sector, communities and governments to  conduct digital cooperation initiatives by explicitly defining the values and  principles that guide them.  The aim is to align stakeholders around a common  vision, maximise the beneficial impacts and minimise the risk of misuse and  unintended consequences. Alongside these shared values, we believe it is useful to highlight operational  principles as a reference point for the future evolution of digital cooperation  mechanisms. The principles we propose for global digital cooperation  mechanisms include that they should: be easy to engage in, open and  transparent; inclusive and accountable to all stakeholders; consult and  debate as locally as possible; encourage innovation of both technologies  and better mechanisms for cooperating; and, seek to maximise the global  public interest. These are set forth in more detail in Annex VI, based on the  experience of internet governance and technical coordination bodies – such  as the WSIS process, UNESCO and the NetMundial conference.204   Defining values and principles is only the first step: we must operationalise  them in practice in the design and development of digital technology and  digital cooperation mechanisms. Where the reach of hard governance is  limited or ambiguous – for example, at the stage of innovation or when  the long-term impact of technologies is hard to predict – values-based  cooperation approaches can play a vital role.  We should look for opportunities to operationalise values and principles at  each step in the design and development of new technologies, as well as  new policy practices. For example, educational institutions could encourage  software developers, business executives and engineers to integrate values  and principles in their work and use professional codes of conduct akin to the  medical profession’s Hippocratic Oath. Businesses can integrate values into  workflows, use values-based measures to assess risk and institute a suitable  incentive structure for staff to follow shared values. Self-assessments and  third-party audits can also help institutionalise a business culture based on  shared values. 4.2 THREE POSSIBLE ARCHITECTURES  FOR GLOBAL DIGITAL COOPERATION The Panel had many discussions about possible practical next steps to  improve the architecture of global digital cooperation and the merits of  proposing new mechanisms or updating existing ones. Some suggested that  many cooperation challenges could be best addressed by strengthening  implementation capacities of current agencies and mandates.  There was broad agreement that improved  cooperation is needed, that such  cooperation will need to take multiple  diverse forms, and that governments, the  private sector and civil society will need to  find new ways to work together to steer an  effective path between extremes of overregulation and complete laissez-faire. While no single vision emerged, there was broad agreement that improved  cooperation is needed, that such cooperation will need to take multiple diverse  forms, and that governments, the private sector and civil society will need to  find new ways to work together to steer an effective path between extremes  of over-regulation and complete laissez-faire. Based on our consultations, the  Panel felt that presenting options for digital cooperation architectures would  best contribute to the discourse on global digital cooperation."
The Age of Digital Interdependence 24Annex VI sets out functions that a digital cooperation architecture could  be designed to improve. These include generating political will, ensuring  the active and meaningful participation of all stakeholders, monitoring  developments and identifying trends, creating shared understanding  and purpose, preventing and resolving disputes, building consensus and  following up on agreements.  Below three possible models are proposed that could address some of these  functions. The first enhances and extends the multi-stakeholder IGF. The  second is a distributed architecture which builds on existing mechanisms. The  third envisions a ‘commons’ approach with loose coordination by the UN. All  have benefits and drawbacks. They are put forward here to provide concrete  starting points for the further discussion and broad consultation which we  recommend the UN Secretary-General initiate in our Recommendation 5A. A note on inclusive representation All three models highlighted below would need to take special  steps to ensure that they are broadly representative and develop  specific mechanisms to ensure equitable participation of developing  countries, women and other traditionally marginalised groups who  have often been denied a voice. The proposed Internet Governance Forum Plus, or IGF Plus, would build on  the existing IGF which was established by the World Summit on Information  Society (Tunis, 2005). The IGF is currently the main global space convened  by the UN for addressing internet governance and digital policy issues.  The IGF Plus concept would provide additional multi-stakeholder and  multilateral legitimacy by being open to all stakeholders and by being  institutionally anchored in the UN system.    The IGF Plus would aim to build on the IGF’s strengths, including welldeveloped infrastructure and procedures, acceptance in stakeholder  communities, gender balance in IGF bodies and activities, and a network of  114 national, regional and youth IGFs206.  It would add important capacity  strengthening and other support activities.   The IGF Plus model aims to address the IGF’s current shortcomings. For  example, the lack of actionable outcomes can be addressed by working  on policies and norms of direct interest to stakeholder communities.  The limited participation of government and business representatives,  especially from small and developing countries, can be addressed by  introducing discussion tracks in which governments, the private sector  and civil society address their specific concerns.  The IGF Plus would comprise an Advisory Group, Cooperation Accelerator,  Policy Incubator and Observatory and Help Desk.   The Advisory Group, based on the IGF’s current Multi-stakeholder Advisory  Group, would be responsible for preparing annual meetings, and identifying  focus policy issues each year. This would not exclude coverage of other  issues but ensure a critical mass of discussion on the selected issues.  The Advisory Group could identify moments when emerging discussions  in other forums need to be connected, and issues that are not covered by  existing organisations or mechanisms. Building on the current practices of the IGF, the Advisory Group could  consist of members appointed for three years by the UN Secretary-General  on the advice of member states and stakeholder groups, ensuring gender,  age, stakeholder and geographical balance.   The Cooperation Accelerator would accelerate issue-centred cooperation  across a wide range of institutions, organisations and processes; identify  points of convergence among existing IGF coalitions, and issues around which new coalitions need to be established; convene stakeholder-specific  coalitions to address the concerns of groups such as governments,  businesses, civil society, parliamentarians, elderly people, young people,  philanthropy, the media, and women; and facilitate convergences among  debates in major digital and policy events at the UN and beyond.   The Cooperation Accelerator could consist of members selected for their  multi-disciplinary experience and expertise. Membership would include  civil society, businesses and governments and representation from major  digital events such as the Web Summit, Mobile World Congress, Lift:Lab,  Shift, LaWeb, and Telecom World.    The Policy Incubator would incubate policies and norms for public  discussion and adoption. In response to requests to look at a perceived  regulatory gap, it would examine if existing norms and regulations  could fill the gap and, if not, form a policy group consisting of interested  stakeholders to make proposals to governments and other decisionmaking bodies. It would monitor policies and norms through feedback  from the bodies that adopt and implement them.207  The Policy Incubator could provide the currently missing link between  dialogue platforms identifying regulatory gaps and existing decisionmaking bodies by maintaining momentum in discussions without  making legally binding decisions. It should have a flexible and dynamic  composition involving all stakeholders concerned by a specific policy  issue.  The Observatory and Help Desk would direct requests for help on digital  policy (such as dealing with crisis situations, drafting legislation, or advising  on policy) to appropriate entities, including the Help Desks described in  Recommendation 2; coordinate capacity development activities provided  by other organisations; collect and share best practices; and provide an  overview of digital policy issues, including monitoring trends, identifying  emerging issues and providing data on digital policy. The IGF Trust Fund would be a dedicated fund for the IGF Plus. All  stakeholders – including governments, international organisations,  businesses and the tech sector – would be encouraged to contribute. The  IGF Plus Secretariat should be linked to the Office of the United Nations  Secretary-General to reflect its interdisciplinary and system-wide  approach. “INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM PLUS"205
The Age of Digital Interdependence 25The proposed distributed co-governance architecture (COGOV) would  build on existing mechanisms while filling gaps with new mechanisms  to achieve a distributed, yet cohesive digital cooperation architecture  covering all stages from norm design to implementation and potential  enforcement of such norms by the appropriate authorities.   COGOV relies on the self-forming ‘horizontal’ network approach used  by the Internet Engineering Task Force, the Internet Corporation for  Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the World Wide Web Consortium,  the Regional Internet Registries, the IEEE and others to host networks to  design norms and policies. This proposal would extend this agile network  approach to issues affecting the broader digital economy and society.   Given the wide range of issues which the COGOV architecture could  encompass, it will be imperative to ensure there is broad representation  beyond the relatively homogenous expert communities which  predominate for some of the technical issues discussed above.   The COGOV architecture decouples the design of digital norms from their  implementation and enforcement. It seeks to rapidly produce shared  digital cooperation solutions, including norms, and publish them for  stakeholders to consider and potentially adopt. These norms would be  voluntary solutions rather than legal instruments. In themselves, the  COGOV networks would not have governing authority or enforcement  powers. However, the norms could be taken up by government agencies  as useful blueprints to establish policies, regulations or laws.   The COGOV could consist of three functional elements: a) Digital Cooperation  Networks; b) Network Support Platforms; and, c) a Network of Networks.  a) Digital Cooperation Networks. These networks would be issuespecific horizontal collaboration groups, involving stakeholders from  relevant vertical sectors and institutions. They could be formed freely  by stakeholders in a bottom-up way, self-governed, and share the same  goal of cooperation – including potentially the design of digital norms.  They could be created or supported by one or more governments and/ or intergovernmental organisations with the same concerns. Their  functions would include developing shared understandings and goals for  a specific digital issue, strengthening cooperation, designing or updating  digital norms, providing norm implementation roadmaps and developing  capacity to adopt policies and norms.   Participation in digital cooperation networks should be open for all relevant  and concerned stakeholders, including governments, intergovernmental institutions, the private sector, civil society, academia and the technical  community. Special efforts would need to be made to include and support  representatives from developing countries and traditionally marginalised  groups. The digital cooperation networks may be stand-alone voluntary  networks or hosted by the network support platforms described below. b) Network Support Platforms. These platforms could host and enable  the dynamic formation and functioning of multiple digital cooperation  networks. While the digital cooperation networks would operate in defined  and limited timeframes, the network support platforms are proposed as  stable long-term elements of the architecture, supporting the digital  cooperation networks and enabling them to evolve as necessary to  update their cooperation and relevant digital norms.  The network support platforms should not interfere in the work product  or composition of the self-governed and stakeholder-initiated digital  cooperation networks; they should simply support the networks to  operate efficiently. The platforms would help the networks to identify  emerging issues, secure the commitment of relevant participants,  provide necessary resources and facilities, and promote their outcomes. c) Network of Networks. The network of networks would loosely  coordinate and support activities across all digital cooperation networks  and network support platforms. The role of the network of networks is  to ensure integrity and enable coherent outcomes that account for the  complex inter-dependencies across digital policy issues.  The network of networks would consist of: 1) a support function, which  would organise an annual forum, a ‘research cooperative’ and a ‘norm  exchange’; and 2) a voluntary peer coordination network, which would  bring issues to the attention of the annual forum and follow up on its  recommendations by promoting action from specific stakeholders to  form digital cooperation networks.  The network of networks should avoid a controlling top-down form of  administration: it is simply there to loosely coordinate the activities across  the decentralized COGOV architecture; its decisions would not be binding.  Once norms are available, governing authorities may choose to establish  enforcement mechanisms and may choose to use these norms as policy  input or blueprints. The following table summarises the mechanisms  across the norm design, implementation, and enforcement stages: Norm Design  • Identify digital governance issues • Form digital cooperation networks • Support networks through digital    cooperation platformsNorm Implementation  • Develop norm design and adoption  capacity • Provide a ‘norm exchange’ to connect   communities • Offer implementation incentivesNorm Enforcement  • Develop norms into laws/regulations • Adjudicate/resolve disputes and   conflicts • Establish clear guard rails for digital   technologies“DISTRIBUTED CO-GOVERNANCE ARCHITECTURE”
The Age of Digital Interdependence 26In areas such as space, climate change and the sea, the international  community has entered into treaties and developed principles, norms  and functional cooperation to designate certain spaces as international  ‘commons’ and then govern ongoing practice and dialogue.208 For  instance, the “common heritage” principle, introduced by the United  Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, imposes a duty to protect  resources for the good of future generations.209  While norm-making and guidance in digital technologies will pose different  challenges, some aspects of the digital realm, such as common internet  protocols, already share characteristics with ‘commons’ requiring  responsible and global stewardship. ‘Digital commons’ have also been  mentioned recently in the context of data and AI developments.210    The proposed “Digital Commons Architecture” would aim to synergise  efforts by governments, civil society and businesses to ensure that  digital technologies promote the SDGs and to address risks of social  harm. It would comprise multi-stakeholder tracks to create dialogue  around emerging issues and communicate use cases and problems to be  solved to stakeholders, and an annual meeting to act as a clearing house.  Each track could be owned by a lead organisation – a UN agency, an  industry or academic consortium or a multi-stakeholder forum, with the  choice of participants governed by guiding principles of the kind listed  in this report to ensure inclusiveness and broad representation. Light  coordination of the tracks, and servicing of the annual meeting where  their reports are considered, could be ensured by a small secretariat  housed within the UN.   Analogous to processes such as the International Competition Network,  the Digital Commons Architecture tracks would have flexible, projectoriented and results-based working groups. They would enable learning  on governance and related capacity development to be driven by practice.  Annual meetings could aggregate lessons for use in soft law or more  binding approaches in the appropriate forums. This could rapidly build a  repository of norms and governance practices to guide stakeholders in  their respective roles and responsibilities.The Digital Commons Architecture tracks could focus on issues agreed by  the participants. For example, they might initially wish to address issues  emerging from the preceding chapters, such as using data in support  of the SDGs, using AI to improve agriculture and health, or developing a  global values/ethics certification process for new technology.   Multi-stakeholder collaboration around these issues could pave the  way for wider cooperation. For example, realising the potential of AI to  provide insights to a global health challenge might require the pooling  of reliable data, clear privacy measures, a common data architecture  and interoperable standards. Successful outcomes could then be  progressively extended to other areas. An additional benefit would be to  promote transparency and build confidence.   The annual meeting would not make rules, but provide guidance to  stakeholders, which they can use in the appropriate forums. The meeting  would discuss the output of the various tracks as well as implementation  of the governance guidance produced by these tracks through a ‘soft’  review of reports by stakeholders.    The Digital Commons Architecture might not specify technical solutions,  but instead propose technical models, and standards of accountability  and trustworthiness, which could be applied across the globe. It  could also facilitate a discussion of lessons from around the globe on  implementation of existing norms in specific areas.   The annual meeting could build on and connect discussions taking place  in other fora and could in turn feed its results into discussions taking  place in other fora. This would reduce the current burden of multiplicity of  forums by clarifying who is doing what, eliminating potential overlap, and  identifying partnership opportunities.    The Digital Commons Architecture could be funded through voluntary  contributions. Along the lines of the International Chamber of Commerce,  membership fees could be considered for private sector participation;  these could be waived for certain categories such as small businesses or  civil society participants. 211 A dedicated trust fund could assist with civil  society and least developed country participation. The three potential models share common elements, such as multistakeholder participation, dedicated trust funds to enhance inclusivity,  reducing policy inflation by consolidating discussions across for a, and a  light coordination and convening role for the UN. The values in Chapter 1 and  principles and functions in Annex VI provide shared design elements that  further emphasise inclusivity and multi-stakeholder participation.  Equally, there are differences in emphasis and approach. The COGOV, for  example, foresees a larger role for new networks of experts and multistakeholder governance; the Digital Commons Architecture presumes  more of a focus on iterative learning of governance through practice in  both multilateral and multi-stakeholder tracks; and the IGF Plus adds  functionalities to an existing multi-stakeholder forum with a UN mandate.  The common design elements across the models could be flexibly brought  together once the broad thrust of a new digital cooperation architecture has been defined. As suggested in Recommendation 5A, a common starting  point could be a Global Commitment for Digital Cooperation based on shared  values and principles. “DIGITAL COMMONS ARCHITECTURE”
The Age of Digital Interdependence 274.3 THE ROLE OF THE UN  The UN’s three foundational pillars – peace and security, human rights  and development – position it well to help spotlight issues emerging in  the digital age and advocate on behalf of humanity’s best interests. In our  consultations, we heard that despite its well-known weaknesses, the UN  retains a unique role and convening power to bring stakeholders together to  create the norms and frameworks and assist in developing the capacity we  need to ensure a safe and equitable digital future for all people. the UN retains a unique role and convening  power to bring stakeholders together to  create the norms and frameworks and  assist in developing the capacity we need  to ensure a safe and equitable digital  future for all people.  Digital technologies are increasingly impacting the work of the UN in three  ways: changing the political, social and economic environment in the ways  this report has discussed; providing new tools for its core mandates; and  creating new policy issues.  UN entities have begun to embrace the digital transformation and are  revamping programmes and launching initiatives to apply digital technology  to further their missions. Some UN agencies – such as UNICEF, UNESCO,  the World Food Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Development  Programme (UNDP) – have made a priority of exploring how the digital  transformation can provide them with new approaches to achieve their  mandates. The Task Force on Digital Financing of the SDGs, for example, will  explore how digital technologies can be leveraged to finance the SDGs.212  When digital issues often do not fit neatly within the traditional mandates of  UN agencies, some have sought to expand their mandates, causing overlaps  and friction. This duplication also causes confusion for external partners and  stakeholders, who find it difficult to discern among the many fora, events  and initiatives hosted by various parts of the UN on science, technology and  innovation issues and policy setting. Some UN entities have responded to  converging mandates by launching cross-cutting initiatives. For example,  in 2010 the ITU and UNESCO established the Broadband Commission for  Sustainable Development; in 2016 the ITU, UN Women, the International Trade  Centre (ITC), the GSM Association (GSMA), UNESCO and the United Nations  University set up the EQUALS partnership to tackle the digital gender gap. UN entities have also tended to go about digital issues in their own way, often  without sharing information, at times duplicating each other’s work, and not  reflecting on whether the systems they are building might scale to other UN  entities. UN agencies can do much more to pool their human and computing  capacities and develop shared tools and common standards – for example,  through joint procurement of cloud computing, to reduce price and increase  interoperability, and promoting open and interoperable standards for data  produced and used by the UN. The UN has begun to engage the private sector and tech community much  more directly. For example, Tech Against Terrorism, a public/private partnership  launched in April 2017 by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive  Directorate, aims to support the technology industry to develop more effective and responsible approaches to tackling terrorists’ use of the internet, while  respecting human rights. However, working with stakeholders such as the  private sector and civil society is still not part of the DNA of many UN agencies.  More can be done to partner with other stakeholders effectively and consistently. How can the UN add value in the digital transformation? As a convener  – The AI for Global Good Summit, the Broadband  Commission for Sustainable Development, ITU’s Global Symposium for  Regulators, the WSIS Forum, the Multi-stakeholder Forum on Science,  Technology and Innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals (STI  Forum). Providing a space for debating values and norms  – the IGF, the Group  of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information  and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security,  Special Rapporteurs on the Right to Privacy and on the promotion and  protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression, UNESCO’s  Artificial Intelligence with Human Values for Sustainable Development  initiative, UNICEF’s efforts around children’s online safety. Standard setting  – ITU’s Telecommunication Standardization Sector,  the UN Statistical Commission and its Global Working Group on Big Data  for Official Statistics, WHO guidelines on digital health interventions,  the Humanitarian Data Exchange – an open platform and standard for  sharing data across crises and organisations.  Multi-stakeholder or bilateral initiatives on specific issues  –  EQUALS: The Global Partnership for Gender Equality in the Digital  Age, the Emergency Telecommunications Cluster hosted by WFP, the  UN Global Compact’s Breakthrough Innovation for the SDGs Action  Platform, the Famine Action Mechanism hosted by the World Bank and  the UN in partnership with industry.   Developing the capacity of member states  – UNDP’s Accelerator  Labs, the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, UN Global Pulse Labs,  the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s trainings,  the Digital Blue Helmets initiative, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime’s  Global Programme on Cybercrime. Ranking, mapping and measuring – the annual E-Government Survey  produced by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social  Affairs, the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research’s Cyber  Policy Portal, an online reference tool that maps the cybersecurity  and cybersecurity-related policy landscape, ITU’s Measuring the  Information Society report and Global Cybersecurity Index. Arbitration and dispute-resolution  – The World Intellectual Property  Organization’s Internet Domain Name Process, the United Nations  Commission on International Trade Law. Created by the innovation units of several UN agencies in 2015, the UN  Innovation Network is working on sharing best practices and recommending  harmonisation of policies which may help reduce fragmentation across the  UN system. The UN’s highest-level coordination body, the Chief Executives  Board for Coordination, is trying to encourage more system-wide coordination  through initiatives such as the UN Data Innovation Lab and UN data privacy "
The Age of Digital Interdependence 28principles. The High-level Committee on Programmes could also have a role  to enable more knowledge sharing, efficiencies of scale and scaling up of  successful practices and initiatives across the UN system. The development of the UN Secretary-General’s Strategy on New  Technologies, issued in September 2018, has helped identify points of  overlap and convergence, and UN agencies meet regularly to track progress.  The strategy notes that the Secretary-General may consider appointing a  “Tech Envoy” following the work of this Panel.   The UN can play a key role in enhancing digital cooperation by developing  greater organisational and human capacity on digital governance issues and  improving its ability to respond to member states’ need for policy advice and  capacity development.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 29The preceding chapters of this report have shown that our rapidly  changing and interdependent digital world urgently needs improved digital  cooperation founded on common human values. Based on our analysis  and consultations with diverse stakeholders, and noting that not all Panel  members were supportive of all recommendations, we make the following  recommendations: AN INCLUSIVE DIGITAL ECONOMY AND SOCIETY 1A:    We recommend that by 2030, every adult should have affordable   access to digital networks, as well as digitally-enabled financial and  health services, as a means to make a substantial contribution to  achieving the SDGs. Provision of these services should guard against  abuse by building on emerging principles and best practices, one example  of which is providing the ability to opt in and opt out, and by encouraging  informed public discourse. 1B:    We recommend that a broad, multi-stakeholder alliance, involving  the UN, create a platform for sharing digital public goods, engaging talent  and pooling data sets, in a manner that respects privacy, in areas related  to attaining the SDGs.  1C:    We call on the private sector, civil society, national governments,   multilateral banks and the UN to adopt specific policies to support  full digital inclusion and digital equality for women and traditionally  marginalised groups. International organisations such as the World Bank  and the UN should strengthen research and promote action on barriers  women and marginalised groups face to digital inclusion and digital  equality.    1D:   We believe that a set of metrics for digital inclusiveness should  be urgently agreed, measured worldwide and detailed with sex  disaggregated data in the annual reports of institutions such as the  UN, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, other multilateral  development banks and the OECD. From this, strategies and plans of  action could be developed.  In this report we have emphasised that the role of digital technologies in  achieving the Sustainable Development Goals goes far beyond simply  promoting greater access to the internet. With the right blend of policy,  investment in infrastructure and human capacity, and cooperation among  stakeholders, they can revolutionise fields as diverse as health and  education, governance, economic empowerment and enterprise, agriculture  and environmental sustainability.  The specific decisions needed to promote inclusivity and minimise risks will  depend on local and national conditions. They should consider four main  factors. First, the broader national policy and regulatory frameworks should  make it easy to create, run and grow small businesses. These frameworks  should ensure that digital service providers – including e-commerce and  inclusive finance platforms – support the growth of local enterprises.  This requires enabling policies on investment and innovation, and  structural policies to ensure fair competition, privacy rights, consumer  protection and a sustainable tax base. Efforts to agree regional or global  standards in these areas are welcome.  Second, investments should be made in both human capacity (see  Recommendation 2 below) and physical infrastructure. Creating the  foundation of universal, affordable access to electricity and the internet  will often require innovative approaches, such as community groups  operating rural networks, or incentives such as public sector support.   Third, targeted measures should address the barriers faced by women,  indigenous people, rural populations and others who are marginalised by  factors such as a lack of legal identity, low literacy rates, social norms  that prevent them from fully participating in civic and economic life, and  discriminatory land ownership, tenure and inheritance practices.  Fourth, respect for human rights – including privacy – is fundamental.  Panel members had divergent views on digital ID systems in particular:  they have immense potential to improve delivery of social services,  especially for people who currently lack legal identity, but they are also  vulnerable to abuse. As digital ID becomes more prevalent, we must  emphasise principles for its fair and effective use.   Achieving this ambition will require multi-stakeholder alliances  involving governments, private sector, international organisations,  citizen groups and philanthropy to build new models of collaboration  around “digital public goods” and data sets that can be pooled for the  common good. SDG-related areas include health, energy, agriculture,  clean water, oceans and climate change. These alliances could establish  minimum criteria for classifying technologies and content as “digital  public goods” and connect with relevant communities of practice that  can provide guidance and support for investment, implementation and  capacity development.  We are concerned that women face particular challenges in meaningfully  accessing the internet, inclusive mobile financial services and online  commerce, and controlling their own digital IDs and health records.  Policies should include targeted capacity development for female  entrepreneurs and policy makers. We call on the technology sector to  make more sustained and serious efforts to address the gap in female  technology employees and management, include women’s voices when  determining online terms and conditions, and act to prevent online  harassment and promotion of domestic abuse, building upon the work  of existing initiatives such as the High-level Panel on Women’s Economic  Empowerment.5. Recommendations
The Age of Digital Interdependence 30While some preliminary work is underway, there is currently no agreed set  of clear metrics or standards for the inclusiveness of digital technologies  and cooperation. While any metrics will evolve over time, we call for research  and multi-stakeholder consultation to establish a basis of shared global  understanding as promptly as possible. We encourage the UN, international  development agencies and multilateral banks such as the Asian Development  Bank, the New Development Bank and the World Bank to drive this process by  incorporating digital inclusion as a key metric in approving and evaluating  projects. Facets of digital inclusion which may be considered include gender,  financial services, health, government services, national digital economy  policies, use of online e-commerce platforms and mobile device penetration.  HUMAN AND INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY 2:  We recommend the establishment of regional and global digital  help  desks to help governments, civil society and the private sector to  understand digital issues and develop capacity to steer cooperation  related to social and economic impacts of digital technologies.  Many countries urgently need to make critical choices about the complex  issues discussed in this report. In what types of infrastructure should they  invest? What types of training do their populations require to compete in  the global digital economy? How can those whose livelihoods are disrupted  by technological change be protected? How can technology be used to  deliver social services and improve governance? How can regulation be  appropriately balanced to encourage innovation while protecting human  rights?  Policy decisions will have profound impact, but many of the decision-makers  lack sufficient understanding of digital technologies and their implications.  Capacity development for government officials and regulators could help  to harness technology for inclusive economic development to achieve the  SDGs. Priorities could include diagnostics on digital capacities and how they  interact with society and the economy, and identifying skills workers will  need. Capacity development initiatives with the private sector would also  develop the capacity of officials and regulators to engage with the private  sector so they can understand the operations of the digital economy and  respond in an agile way to emerging issues (see Recommendation 5B). For decisions to be well informed and inclusive, all stakeholders and the  public need also to better understand the benefits and risks of digital  technologies. Decisions around technology should be underpinned by a broad  social dialogue on its costs, benefits and norms. We encourage capacity  development programs for governments, civil society organisations, the  private sector – including small- and medium-sized enterprises and start-ups  – consumers, educators, women and youth. Existing capacity development  initiatives by civil society, academia and technical and international  organisations could benefit from the promotion of best practices.  A regional approach is recommended to develop capacity, to enable  differing local contexts to be addressed. Regional help desks could be led  by organisations such as the African Union or the Association of Southeast  Asian Nations, in collaboration with UN Regional Commissions. The regional  help desks would: conduct research and promote best practice in digital  cooperation; provide capacity development training and recommend opensource or licensed products and platforms; and support requests for advice  from governments, local private sector (particularly small and medium  enterprises) and civil society in their regions. Staff would have regional  expertise, and coordinate closely with the private sector and civil society. A global help desk to coordinate the work of regional help desks could form  part of the new digital cooperation architecture we recommend exploring in  Recommendation 5A. HUMAN RIGHTS AND HUMAN AGENCY  3A:    Given that human rights apply fully in the digital world, we urge  the UN Secretary-General to institute an agencies-wide review of how  existing international human rights accords and standards apply to new  and emerging digital technologies. Civil society, governments, the private  sector and the public should be invited to submit their views on how to  apply existing human rights instruments in the digital age in a proactive  and transparent process.  3B:      In the face of growing threats to human rights and safety, including  those of children, we call on social media enterprises to work with  governments, international and local civil society organisations and  human rights experts around the world to fully understand and respond  to concerns about existing or potential human rights violations. 3C:  We believe that autonomous intelligent systems should be  designed in ways that enable their decisions to be explained and  humans to be accountable for their use. Audits and certification  schemes should monitor compliance of AI systems with engineering and  ethical standards, which should be developed using multi-stakeholder  and multilateral approaches. Life and death decisions should not be  delegated to machines. We call for enhanced digital cooperation with  multiple stakeholders to think through the design and application of  these standards and principles such as transparency and non-bias in  autonomous intelligent systems in different social settings.    As discussed in Chapter 3, while human rights apply online as well as  offline, technology presents challenges that were not foreseen when  many foundational human rights accords were created. National laws and  regulations must prevent advances in technology being used to erode  human rights or avoid accountability. We need to cooperate to ensure that  digital technologies advance the inherent dignity and equal and inalienable  rights of every human.  Applying human rights in the digital age requires better coordination  and communication between governments, technology companies, civil  society and other stakeholders. Companies have often reacted slowly  and inadequately to learning that their technologies are being deployed in  ways that undermine human rights. We need more forward-looking efforts  to identify and mitigate risks in advance: companies should consult with  governments, civil society and academia to assess the potential human  rights impact of the digital technologies they are developing. From risk  assessment to ongoing due diligence and responsiveness to sudden  events, it should be clarified what society can reasonably expect from each  stakeholder, including technology firms.  In some areas there is consensus that much more needs to be done –  notably, companies providing social media services need to do more  to prevent the dissemination of hatred and incitement of violence, and  companies providing online services and apps used by children need to do  more to ensure appropriate design and meaningful data consent. Consensus is also emerging that more needs to be done to safeguard  the human right to privacy: individuals often have little or no meaningful 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 31understanding of the implications of providing their personal data in return  for digital services. We believe companies, governments and civil society  should agree to clear and transparent standards that will enable greater  interoperability of data in ways that protect privacy while enabling data to  flow for commercial, research and government purposes, and supporting  innovation to achieve the SDGs. Such standards should prevent data  collection going beyond intended use, limit re-identification of individuals  via datasets, and give individuals meaningful control over how their personal  data is shared.  We also emphasise our belief that autonomous intelligent systems should  be designed in ways that enable their decisions to be explained and humans  to be held to account for their use. Audits and certification schemes should  monitor compliance of AI systems with engineering and ethical standards.  Humans should never delegate life and death decisions to machines. TRUST, SECURITY AND STABILITY 4.   We recommend the development of a Global Commitment on Digital  Trust and Security to shape a shared vision, identify attributes of digital  stability, elucidate and strengthen the implementation of norms for  responsible uses of technology, and propose priorities for action. As the digital economy increasingly merges with the physical world and  deploys autonomous intelligent systems, it depends ever more on trust and  the stability of the digital environment. Trust is built through agreed standards,  shared values and best practices. Stability implies a digital environment that  is peaceful, secure, open and cooperative. More effective action is needed to  prevent trust and stability being eroded by the proliferation of irresponsible  use of cyber capabilities.  The Global Commitment on Digital Trust and Security could build on and  create momentum behind the voluntary norms agreed in the report of the  2015 GGE, and complement relevant global processes. It could address areas  such as ways to strengthen implementation of agreed norms; developing  societal capacity for cybersecurity and resilience against misinformation;  encouraging companies to strengthen authentication practices, adhere to  stricter software development norms and be more transparent in the use of  software and components; and improving the digital hygiene of new users  coming online.  GLOBAL DIGITAL COOPERATION 5A:  We recommend that, as a matter of urgency, the UN SecretaryGeneral facilitate an agile and open consultation process to develop  updated mechanisms for global digital cooperation, with the options  discussed in Chapter 4 as a starting point. We suggest an initial goal of  marking the UN's 75th anniversary in 2020 with a “Global Commitment for  Digital Cooperation” to enshrine shared values, principles, understandings  and objectives for an improved global digital cooperation architecture. As  part of this process, we understand that the UN Secretary-General may  appoint a Technology Envoy. 5B:       We support a multi-stakeholder “systems” approach for cooperation  and regulation that is adaptive, agile, inclusive and fit for purpose for the  fast-changing digital age.  Enhancing digital cooperation will require both reinvigorating existing  multilateral partnerships and potentially the creation of new mechanisms that involve stakeholders from business, academia, civil society and  technical organisations. We should approach questions of governance based  on their specific circumstances and choosing among all available tools. Where possible we can make existing inter-governmental forums and  mechanisms fit for the digital age rather than rush to create new mechanisms,  though this may involve difficult judgement calls: for example, while the  WTO remains a major forum to address issues raised by the rapid growth in  cross-border e-commerce, it is now over two decades since it was last able to  broker an agreement on the subject.  Given the speed of change, soft governance mechanisms – values and  principles, standards and certification processes – should not wait for  agreement on binding solutions. Soft governance mechanisms are also  best suited to the multi-stakeholder approach demanded by the digital age:  a fact-based, participative process of deliberation and design, including  governments, private sector, civil society, diverse users and policy-makers. The aim of the holistic “systems” approach we recommended is to bring  together government bodies such as competition authorities and consumer  protection agencies with the private sector, citizens and civil society  to enable them to be more agile in responding to issues and evaluating  trade-offs as they emerge. Any new governance approaches in digital  cooperation should also, wherever possible, look for ways – such as pilot  zones, regulatory sandboxes or trial periods – to test efficacy and develop  necessary procedures and technology before being more widely applied.213   We envisage that the process of developing a “Global Commitment for Digital  Cooperation” would be inspired by the “World We Want” process, which helped  formulate the SDGs. Participants would include governments, the private  sector from technology and other industries, SMEs and entrepreneurs, civil  society, international organisations including standards and professional  organisations, academic scholars and other experts, and government  representatives from varied departments at regional, national, municipal  and community levels. Multi-stakeholder consultation in each member state  and region would allow ideas to bubble up from the bottom.    The consultations on an updated global digital cooperation architecture  could define upfront the criteria to be met by the governance mechanisms  to be proposed, such as funding models, modes of operation and means for  serving the functions explored in this report.  More broadly, if appointed, a UN Tech Envoy could identify over-the-horizon  concerns that need improved cooperation or governance; provide lighttouch coordination of multi-stakeholder actors to address shared concerns;  reinforce principles and norms developed in forums with relevant mandates;  and work with UN member states, civil society and businesses to support  compliance with agreed norms.  The Envoy’s mandate could also include coordinating the digital technologyrelated efforts of UN entities; improving communication and collaboration  among technology experts within the UN; and advising the UN SecretaryGeneral on new technology issues. Finally, the Envoy could promote  partnerships to build and maintain international digital common resources  that could be used to help achieve the SDGs.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 32We believe in a future which is inclusive and empowering; a future in  which digital technologies are used to reduce inequalities, bring people  together, enhance international peace and security and promote economic  opportunity and environmental sustainability.  Our recommendations toward that future will require sustained commitment  to fundamental human values. They will require leadership and political  will, clarity about roles and responsibilities, shared meanings to ease  communication, inclusive partnerships with capacity development, aligned  incentives, greater coherence of currently fragmented efforts, and building  a climate of trust.  We hope this report has shown why individuals, civil society, the private  sector and governments urgently need to strengthen cooperation to build  that better future.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 33I. TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE PANEL 1. The High-Level Panel on Digital Cooperation convened by the UN  Secretary-General will advance proposals to strengthen cooperation in  the digital space among Governments, the private sector, civil society,  international organisations, the technical and academic communities and all  other relevant stakeholders. The Panel’s report and its recommendations will  provide a high-level independent contribution to the broader public debate  on digital cooperation frameworks and support Member States in their  consultations on these issues.  2. The Panel will consist of 20 eminent leaders from Governments, private  sector, academia, the technical community, and civil society led by two cochairs. Its composition will be balanced in terms of gender, age, geographic  representation, and area of expertise. The Panel members will serve in their  personal capacity.  3. The Panel shall meet in person at least once. Additional interactions  shall be organised for the Panel as a whole by electronic means or through  ad hoc group consultations. The Panel will engage and consult widely with  governments, private sector, academia, technical community, civil society,  and inter-governmental organisations across the world. It shall be agile and  innovative in interacting with existing processes and platforms as well as in  harnessing inputs from diverse stakeholders.  4. In its report to the Secretary-General, the Panel shall identify good  practices and opportunities, gaps and challenges in digital cooperation.  It shall also outline major trends in the development and deployment of  emerging digital technologies, business models, and policies and the  possibilities and challenges they generate for digital cooperation.   5. In particular, the report shall: • Raise awareness among policy makers and the general public about   the transformative impact of digital technologies across society and the   economy;  • Suggest ways to bridge disciplines on digital cooperation by identifying   policy, research and information gaps as well as ways to improve   interdisciplinary thinking and cross-domain action on digital   technologies;  • Present recommendations for effective, inclusive, accountable systems   of digital cooperation among all relevant actors in the digital space. 6. The recommendations in the report shall seek to maximise the potential of  digital technologies to contribute inter alia to the achievement of the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development and to support progress across a range  of themes, including digital empowerment, inclusive finance, employment,  entrepreneurship, trade and cross border data flows.  7 . They shall also contribute to raising individual and systemic capacities to maximise the benefits of emerging digital technologies; to facilitating the  participation of all stakeholder groups, especially youth and women, in the  digital sphere and; to enhancing implementation of existing digital policies  as well as norms.  8. The Panel shall avoid duplication with existing forums for digital  cooperation. It shall fully respect current UN structures as well as national,  technical community and industry prerogatives in the development and  governance of digital technologies.  9. The Panel will complete its deliberations and submit its final report,  including actionable recommendations, within a nine-month period.  10. The deliberations of the Panel will be supported by a small secretariat and  funded by donor resources. The Secretariat shall seek to leverage existing  platforms and partners, including UN agencies, working in the related  domains.Annexes
The Age of Digital Interdependence 34II. PANEL MEMBERS Co-Chairs • Melinda Gates (USA), Co-Chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation • Jack Ma (China), Executive Chairman, Alibaba Group Members • Mohammed Abdullah Al Gergawi (UAE), Minister of Cabinet Affairs and the   Future, UAE • Yuichiro Anzai (Japan), Senior Advisor and Director of Center for Science   Information Analysis, Japan Society for the Promotion of Science • Nikolai Astrup (Norway), Former Minister of International Development,   now Minister of Digitalisation, Norway • Vinton Cerf (USA), Vice President and Chief Internet Evangelist, Google • Fadi Chehadé (USA), Chairman, Chehadé & Company • Sophie Soowon Eom (Republic of Korea), Founder of Adriel AI and   Solidware  • Isabel Guerrero Pulgar (Chile), Executive Director, IMAGO Global   Grassroots and Lecturer, Harvard Kennedy School • Marina Kaljurand (Estonia), Chair of the Global Commission on the   Stability of Cyberspace • Bogolo Kenewendo (Botswana), Minister of Investment, Trade and   Industry, Botswana • Marina Kolesnik (Russian Federation), senior executive, entrepreneur   and WEF Young Global Leader • Doris Leuthard (Switzerland), former President and Federal Councillor of   the Swiss Confederation, Switzerland • Cathy Mulligan (United Kingdom), Visiting Researcher, Imperial College   London and Chief Technology Officer of GovTech Labs at University   College London • Akaliza Keza Ntwari (Rwanda), ICT advocate and entrepreneur • Edson Prestes (Brazil), Professor, Institute of Informatics, Federal   University of Rio Grande do Sul • Kira Radinsky (Israel), Director of Data Science, eBay • Nanjira Sambuli (Kenya), Senior Policy Manager, World Wide Web   Foundation • Dhananjayan Sriskandarajah (Australia), Chief Executive, Oxfam GB • Jean Tirole (France), Chairman of the Toulouse School of Economics and   the Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse Ex officio • Amandeep Singh Gill (India), Executive Director, Secretariat of the High level Panel on Digital Cooperation • Jovan Kurbalija (Serbia), Executive Director, Secretariat of the High-level   Panel on Digital Cooperation
The Age of Digital Interdependence 35III. PANEL SECRETARIAT AND SUPPORT TEAMS Panel Secretariat • Isabel de Sola, Senior Adviser, Engagement • Amandeep Singh Gill, Executive Director • Jovan Kurbalija, Executive Director • Ananita Maitra, Project Officer, Policy and Engagement • Chengetai Masango, Senior Adviser (on loan from the IGF Secretariat,   July-October 2018) • Lisa McMonagle, Intern • Madeline McSherry, Project Officer, Engagement • Claire Messina, Deputy Executive Director • AJung Moon, Senior Adviser, Research & Industry • Athira Murali, Intern • Anoush Rima Tatevossian, Senior Communications Officer • Talea von Lupin, Intern • Andrew Wright, Writer Sherpas and Support Teams • Co-Chair Melinda Gates: Gargee Ghosh, John Norris • Co-Chair Jack Ma: James Song, Jason Pau, Sami Farhad, Yuan Ren
The Age of Digital Interdependence 36IV. DONORS  The Panel gratefully acknowledges the financial and in-kind contributions  of the following governments and partners, without whom it would not have  been able to carry out its responsibilities: Robert Bosch Stiftung Government of the People’s Republic of China Government of Denmark Government of Finland Ford Foundation Global Challenges Foundation IGF Secretariat Government of Israel Government of Norway Government of Qatar Government of Switzerland Government of the United Arab Emirates UN Foundation 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 37V. THE PANEL ’S ENGAGEMENT  As per its terms of reference, the Panel engaged widely with governments,  private sector, academia, the technical community, civil society, and intergovernmental organisations across the world. The aims of its engagement  strategy were to provide stakeholders with an opportunity to contribute  meaningfully to the reflection process of the Panel; catalyse multistakeholder and interdisciplinary cooperation on digital issues; and cocreate the report’s recommendations with stakeholders, with a view to  building buy-in for their implementation. The engagement strategy was guided by three main tenets:  • Breadth and inclusivity:  The Panel aimed to consult as broadly as   possible across regions, demographics, topics, sectors and disciplines.   The process strove to be as inclusive as possible of diverse groupings.  • Depth:  The Panel worked with experts and conducted ‘deep dives’ on   specific focus areas through virtual or in-person consultations as well as   bilateral interviews.  • Interdisciplinarity:  Many digital challenges are currently addressed in   policy or agency silos; to promote more holistic approaches, the Panel’s   activities invited interdisciplinary and multisectoral perspectives to the   table.  The Panel was conscious of the importance of avoiding duplication of efforts  and ‘consultation fatigue’ amongst digital stakeholders. Building on existing  networks and policy forums, engagement activities took place as close as  possible to stakeholders on the ground. The Panel also consciously assumed  the learnings of previous commissions and existing working groups while  also harnessing opportunities to connect the issues in new ways. ACTIVITIES  Conducting a global consultation in the span of few months would not have  been possible without the immense support of dozens of organisations and  governments worldwide who lent their resources and networks to the Panel.  Engagement proceeded in two phases: in the ‘listening’ phase, in the autumn of  2018, the Panel actively collected stakeholders’ concerns and ideas on digital  cooperation. Feedback from stakeholders was fed into the Panel’s scoping  of its work and formed the basis of the nine “enablers of digital cooperation”  articulated mid-way through the Panel process. In the spring of 2019, the focus  shifted to ‘road-testing’ the Panel’s emerging recommendations. Stakeholders  from across sectors were invited to comment on and critique the draft  recommendations with a view to improving them.   Overall, the Panel and its Secretariat carried out 125 engagement activities;  these included participating in 44 digital policy events and organising 10  thematic workshops (on subjects such as values and principles, digital  trust and security, data, digital health), 28 briefings to various stakeholder  communities, 11 visits to digital hubs and capitals, 22 virtual meetings with  subject-matter experts, and 10 townhall meetings open to the public. In  addition, the Panel held a large number of bilateral meetings with a variety  of stakeholders.  A virtual window for consultation was opened via the Panel’s website. In  October 2018, an open Call for Contributions was launched; by January  2019, when the call closed, 167 stakeholders had sent written submissions.  Additionally, an informal public opinion survey was set up to capture the  views of stakeholders on the digital issues of greatest concern. In total, the Panel and its Secretariat engaged with over 4,000 individuals  representing 104 states, 80 international organisations, 203 private sector  companies, 125 civil society organisations, 33 technical organisations, and  188 think tanks and academic institutions.  Our analysis of approximately 1200 core participants in our engagement  process finds that 40% were women; 3% were aged under 30; and the regional  breakdown was 20% North America, 19% Europe, 13% Sub-Saharan Africa, 8%  Latin America and the Caribbean, 7% South and Central Asia, 7% Southeast  and East Asia, and 4% Middle East (the rest had a global remit).   These results show that we did not wholly avoid a skew towards male and  Western voices, though they compare favourably with many such exercises  in the technology sector. They indicate the continuing need for digital  cooperation mechanisms to make specific efforts to ensure inclusivity,  and highlight in particular the challenge of bringing the “digital native” youth  generation into digital policymaking.  PARTNERS The Panel would like to thank the following partners for their generous  assistance and support to its engagement process:  Access Now African Union Commission Alibaba Group APEC China Business Council (ACBC) Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship of Argentina  Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) Association for Progressive Communication (APC) Government of Benin Botnar Foundation Business Council for the United Nations Consulate General of Canada in San Francisco CERN China Chamber of International Commerce (CCOIC) Data2x  Digital Empowerment Foundation Digital Impact Alliance (DIAL)  Diplo Foundation Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations and Other  International Organisations in Geneva Direction interministérielle du numérique et du système d’information et de  communication de l’Etat, France Freedom Online Coalition Gateway House  Geneva Internet Platform Global Commission on Stability of Cyberspace Global Partners Digital Global Partnership on Sustainable Development Data  Global Tech Panel GSM Association (GSMA) Hangzhou Normal University Impact Hub Basel Infosys International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
The Age of Digital Interdependence 38International Telecommunications Union (ITU) Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) iSPIRT JD.com  JSC National ICT Holding Zerde Government of Kazakhstan King’s College London Lee Kwan Yew School of Public Policy New America Foundation Nokia Observer Research Foundation Office of Denmark’s Technology Ambassador Omidyar Foundation Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) Schwarzman Scholars, Tsinghua University Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Singapore Stanford University Tata Consultancy Services, Mumbai United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)  United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean  (ECLAC) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)  United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) United Nations Global Pulse  United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) United Nations Office at Geneva United Nations University University of California, Berkeley University of Geneva Verizon Wireless  Web Summit  Western Balkans Digital Summit Wonder Ventures World Bank World Economic Forum World Economic Forum Center for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, San  Francisco World Government Summit, Dubai World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World Internet Conference World Summit AI
The Age of Digital Interdependence 39VI. PRINCIPLES AND FUNCTIONS OF DIGITAL  COOPERATION  In the course of our outreach, many stakeholders suggested principles to  which digital cooperation mechanisms should adhere and functions they  should seek to serve. Drawing also on work of previous initiatives in these  areas, this annex summarises the principles and functions we suggest are  most important to guide the future evolution of digital cooperation.     KEY PRINCIPLES OF DIGITAL COOPERATION  • Consensus-oriented:  Decisions should be made in ways that seek   consensus among public, private and civic stakeholders. • Polycentric:  Decision-making should be highly distributed and loosely   yet efficiently coordinated across specialised centres. • Customised:  There is generally no “one size fits all” solution; different   communities can implement norms in their own way, according to   circumstances. • Subsidiarity:  Decisions should be made as locally as possible, closest to   where the issues and problems are. • Accessible: It should be as easy as possible to engage in digital   cooperation mechanisms and policy discussions.   • Inclusive: Decisions should be inclusive and democratic, representing   diverse interests and accountable to all stakeholders. • Agile:  Digital cooperation should be dynamic, iterative and responsive to   fast-emerging policy issues. • Clarity in roles and responsibility: Clear roles and shared language   should reduce confusion and support common understanding about the   responsibilities of actors involved in digital cooperation (governments,   private sector, civil society, international organisations and academia).  • Accountable: There should be measurable outcomes, accountability and   means of redress. • Resilient: Power distribution should be balanced across sectors, without   centralised top-down control. • Open:  Processes should be transparent, with minimum barriers to entry. • Innovative: It should always be possible to innovate new ways of   cooperating, in a bottom-up way, which is also the best way to include   diverse perspectives. • Tech-neutral:  Decisions should not lock in specific technologies but allow   for innovation of better and context-appropriate alternatives.  • Equitable outcomes:  Digital cooperation should maximise the global   public interest (internationally) and be anchored in broad public benefit   (nationally). KEY FUNCTIONS OF DIGITAL COOPERATION • Leadership  – generating political will among leaders from government,   business, and society, and providing an authoritative response to digital   policy challenges. • Deliberation  – providing a platform for regular, comprehensive and   impactful deliberations on digital issues with the active and effective   participation of all affected stakeholders. • Ensuring inclusivity  – ensuring active and meaningful participation of   all stakeholders, for example by linking with existing and future bottom up networks and initiatives.214   • Evidence and data  – monitoring developments and identifying trends to   inform decisions, including by analysing existing data sources. • Norms and policy making  – building consensus among diverse   stakeholders, respecting the roles of states and international   organisations in enacting and enforcing laws.  • Implementation  – following up on policy discussions and agreements.  • Coordination  – creating shared understanding and purpose across   bodies in different policy areas and at different levels (local, national,   regional, global), ensuring synchronisation of efforts, interoperability   and policy coherence, and the possibility of voluntary coordination   between interested stakeholder groups.   • Partnerships  – catalysing partnerships around specific issues by   providing opportunities to network and collaborate. • Support and capacity development – strengthening capacity    development, monitoring digital developments, identifying trends,   informing policy actors and the public of emerging risks and   opportunities, and providing data for evidence-based decision making   – allowing traditionally marginalised persons or other less-resourced   stakeholders to actively participate in the system.  • Conflict resolution and crisis management  – developing the skills,   knowledge and tools to prevent and resolve disputes and connect   stakeholders with assistance in a crisis.
The Age of Digital Interdependence 401 See Annex I for the Panel’s terms of reference. 2 United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development, Mapping of international Internet public policy issues, 17 April 2015,   E/CN.16/2015/CRP.2, available at https://unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/ecn162015crp2_en.pdf 3 GIP Digital Watch Observatory, May 2019, available at https://dig.watch/mechanisms 4 AI Impacts, “Trends in the cost of computing”, 10 March 2015, available at https://aiimpacts.org/trends-in-the-cost-of-computing/ 5 Internet World Stats, “World Internet users and population statistics”, March 2019, available at https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm; and IoT   Analytics, “State of the IoT 2018: Number of IoT devices now at 7B – Market accelerating”, August 2018, available at https://iot-analytics.com/state-ofthe-iot-update-q1-q2-2018-number-of-iot-devices-now-7b/   6 The World Bank, Global Findex Database 2017 , April 2018, available at https://globalfindex.worldbank.org   7 Council on Foreign Relations, “Hate Speech on Social Media: Global Comparisons”, 11 April 2019, available at https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/ hate-speech-social-media-global-comparisons; United Nations General Assembly, resolution on the right to privacy in the digital age (A/RES/73/179),  December 2018, available at https://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/73/179; FireEye, M-Trends 2019 (Annual Threat Report),  2019, available at https://content.fireeye.com/m-trends; Freedom House, “Freedom on the Net 2018: The rise of digital authoritarianism”, October 2018,   available at https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/freedom-net-2018/rise-digital-authoritarianism 8 Internet World Stats, “World Internet users and population statistics”, March 2019, available at https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm 9 The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is one of the many entities that recognise the multiple dimensions of the digital divide and work toward   facilitating digital inclusion of marginalised groups. More details at ITU, Digital Inclusion, available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Digital-Inclusion/ Pages/default.aspx 10 Our public call for contributions received a number of suggestions on values, available at www.digitalcooperation.org/responses. We also engaged a   diverse set of stakeholders and experts to elicit relevant values and how they could be embedded in policy approaches and cooperation architectures.   Our engagement built on a recent surge of interest in values and ethics in the digital context: see Future of Life Institute, Asilomar Principles, 2017 ,   available at https://futureoflife.org/ai-principles/; WEF White Paper on Values, Ethics and Innovation, August 2018, available at http://www3.weforum. org/docs/WEF_WP_Values_Ethics_Innovation_2018.pdf ; Montreal Declaration for a responsible development of AI,   2018, available at https://www.montrealdeclaration-responsibleai.com/the-declaration; the World Wide Web Foundation’s Contract for the Web,   available at https://contractfortheweb.org; the EU High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence’s Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial   Intelligence, 2019, available at https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ai-alliance-consultation/guidelines#Top  11 WEF report “Our Shared Digital Future Building an Inclusive, Trustworthy and Sustainable Digital Society”, December 2018, available at http://www3. weforum.org/docs/WEF_Our_Shared_Digital_Future_Report_2018.pdf  12 For an introduction to the underlying technology trends and impact on the economy, see “Vectors of Digital Transformation”, OECD Digital Economy   Papers: January 2019, No. 273.  13 World Bank, World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends, “How the Internet Promotes Development”, 2016. 14 Financial inclusion is defined as the ability to “access and use a range of appropriate and responsibly provided financial services offered in a well regulated environment.” (UNCDF, Financial Inclusion, available at https://www.uncdf.org/financial-inclusion) 15 World Bank, World Bank Global Findex Database: Measuring Fintech Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution, 2017 , available at https://globalfindex. worldbank.org/  16 Mobile money serves as a tool for financial inclusion, allowing those without traditional bank accounts to participate in the economy on a greater level   (McKinsey, “Mobile money in emerging markets: The business case for financial inclusion”, March 2018). 17 Women Deliver, “If We Want to Go Far, We Must Go Together”, 21 January 2019, available at https://womendeliver.org/2019/if-you-want-to-go-far-youmust-go-together/ 18 Financial Stability Board, “FinTech and market structure in financial services: Market developments and potential financial stability implications”,   14 February 2019, available at https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P140219.pdf 19 The Economist, “Financial inclusion in the rich world”, 4 May 2018, available at https://www.economist.com/special-report/2018/05/04/financialinclusion-in-the-rich-world 20 M-Pesa is a mobile money service that allows users to transfer cash using their mobile phone numbers without the need for a bank account. It serves   over 17 million Kenyans and offers loan and savings products as well. See The Economist, “Why does Kenya lead the world in mobile money?”. 02 March   2015, available at https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2015/03/02/why-does-kenya-lead-the-world-in-mobile-money. 21 Ming Zeng, “Smart Business: What Alibaba Success Reveals about the Future of Strategy”, Harvard Business Review 2018, pp 58-59. 22 Harvard Business School, “Replicating MPESA: Lessons from Vodafone (Safaricom) on why mobile money fails to gain traction in other markets”, 20   November 2016, available at https://rctom.hbs.org/submission/replicating-mpesa-lessons-from-vodafonesafaricom-on-why-mobile-money-fails-togain-traction-in-other-markets/  Notes
The Age of Digital Interdependence 4123 Accion, “The game-changing innovation that could bring financial services to millions in India”, 30 October 2017 , available at https://www.accion.org/ the-game-changing-innovation-that-could-bring-financial-services-to-millions-in-india  24 GSM Association, State of the Industry Report on Mobile Money 2018, available at https://www.gsma.com/r/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/GSMA-Stateof-the-Industry-Report-on-Mobile-Money-2018.pdf 25 World Bank, Global ID4D Dataset, 2017 , and World Bank, ID4D-Findex survey. 26 MGI, “Digital Identity: A Key to Inclusive Growth”, MGI (Jan 2019). The report focuses on 7 diverse economies: Brazil, China, Ethiopia, India, Nigeria, the  United Kingdom, and the United States. 27 See for example Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (St. Martin's Press, 2018), excerpt  available at https://us.macmillan.com/excerpt?isbn=9781250074317  28 ID4D, available at http://id4d.worldbank.org/  29 MOSIP, available at https://www.mosip.io/  30 Luohan Academy, “Digital Technology and Inclusive Growth”, 2019, available at https://gw.alipayobjects.com/os/antfincdn/DbLN6yXw6H/Luohan_ Academy-Report_2019_Executive_Summary.pdf     31 World Bank: “E-commerce Participation and Household Income Growth in Taobao Villages”, April 2019, available at http://documents.worldbank.org/ curated/en/839451555093213522/pdf/E-Commerce-Participation-and-Household-Income-Growth-in-Taobao-Villages.pdf; World Bank,   “E-commerce for poverty alleviation in rural China: from grassroots development to public-private partnerships”, 19 March 2019, available at http:// beta-blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapacific/e-commerce-poverty-alleviation-rural-china-grassroots-development-public-private-partnerships; World  Development Report 2016, “E-commerce with Chinese characteristics: inclusion, efficiency and innovation in Taobao villages”.  32 United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Information Economy Report 2015, Unlocking the Potential of E-Commerce for Developing   Countries, 2015, available at https://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/ier2015_en.pdf 33 “Riding the Big Data Wave in 2017”, Medium, 17 April 2017 , available at https://medium.com/@Byte_Academy/due-to-an-exponential-increase-in-datain-the-21st-century-a-new-term-big-data-was-coined-few-8f02a5973023 34 United Nations, The Sustainable Development Goals Report: 2018. 35 World Health Organization, “Civil registration: why counting births and deaths is important”, 30 May 2014, available at https://www.who.int/news-room/ fact-sheets/detail/civil-registration-why-counting-births-and-deaths-is-important  36 The World Bank, PovcalNet, available at http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/povOnDemand.aspx 37 This definition is substantially drawn from Recital 26 of the GDPR which defines anonymized data as “data rendered anonymous in such a way that the   data subject is not or no longer identifiable.” 38 United States Agency for International Development, “Fighting Ebola with Information”, available at http://www.digitaldevelopment.org/fighting-ebola information   39 World Health Organization, Global Strategy on Digital Health, 26 March 2019, available at https://extranet.who.int/dataform/upload/surveys/183439/ files/Draft%20Global%20Strategy%20on%20Digital%20Health.pdf 40 CGAIR Platform for Big Data in Agriculture, available at https://bigdata.cgiar.org/ 41 Jason Plautz, “Cheap, Portable Sensors are Democratizing Air-Quality Data”, Wired, 7 November 2018, available at https://www.wired.com/story/cheapportable-sensors-are-democratizing-air-quality-data/ 42 For more information on global digital public goods, see: https://digitalpublicgoods.net/public-goods/ 43 Paul Krugman and Robin Wells, Microeconomics (Worth Publishers, New York, NY, 2013). 44 See “About India Stack”, available at: https://indiastack.org/about/ 45 Pathways to Prosperity Commission, 2018, available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/stat/default.aspx   46 WIRED, “Global Internet Access is Even More Worse than Dire Reports Suggest”, 23 October 2018, available at https://www.wired.com/story/globalinternet-access-dire-reports/  47 The index measures 84 countries from 2018-2019. The Economist, The Inclusive Internet Index 2019, available at https://theinclusiveinternet.eiu.com/  48 Ibid.  49 In India nearly two-thirds of urban areas have connectivity, compared to just over a fifth of rural regions. See The Internet and Mobile Association of India  (IAMAI), Mobile Internet Report, 2017 .  50 World Economic Forum, “Delivering Digital Infrastructure Advancing the Internet Economy”, April 2014, available at http://www3.weforum.org/docs/ WEF_TC_DeliveringDigitalInfrastructure_InternetEconomy_Report_2014.pdf 51 The Alliance for Affordable Internet, available at https://a4ai.org/ 52 Broadband Commission for Sustainable Development, available at https://www.broadbandcommission.org/Pages/default.aspx 53 UNICEF, "Project Connect, in Partnership with UNICEF’s Office of Innovation, Launches First of Its Kind, Interactive Map Visualizing the Digital Divide in  Education", 02 November 2017 , available at http://unicefstories.org/2017/11/02/schoolmappingprojectconnect/ 54 World Bank, “Connecting for Inclusion: Broadband Access for All”, available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/digitaldevelopment/brief/connectingfor-inclusion-broadband-access-for-all   55 IEEE Spectrum, "How Project Loon Built the Navigation System That Kept Its Balloons Over Puerto Rico", 8 March 2018, available at https://spectrum. ieee.org/tech-talk/telecom/internet/how-project-loon-built-the-navigation-system-that-kept-its-balloons-over-puerto-rico 56 Reuters, "Amazon plans to launch over 3,000 satellites to offer broadband internet", 04 April 2019, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/ us-amazon-com-broadband/amazon-plans-to-launch-over-3000-satellites-to-offer-broadband-internet-idUSKCN1RG1YW; Reuters, "U.S. regulator  approves SpaceX plan for broadband satellite services", 29 March 2018, available at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-spacex-fcc/u-s-regulatorapproves-spacex-plan-for-broadband-satellite-services-idUSKBN1H537E
The Age of Digital Interdependence 4257 The Jakarta Post, "Govt to expand broadband connectivity as internet use grows", 20 February 2018, available at https://www.thejakartapost.com/ news/2018/02/20/govt-to-expand-broadband-connectivity-as-internet-use-grows.html 58 ITU, “Universal Service Fund and Digital Inclusion for All Study”, June 2013, available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Conferences/GSR/Documents/ ITU%20USF%20Final%20Report.pdf 59 One example of building internet access around community needs, in this case health, is a collaboration between the Basic Internet Foundation and  health centres in Tanzania; see Vision 2030, available at https://www.vision2030.no/index.php/en/visjon2030-projects/non-discriminating-accessfor-digital-inclusion. The Panel has been informed that a ‘common bid’ for connectivity is being prepared by ITU, UNICEF and the World Bank. 60 BBC, Video: Internet access in Africa - Are mesh networks the future?, 28 March 2019, available at https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-47723967 .  There is another example from rural England of the power of a cooperative approach: farmers waived right of way charges and volunteered to help dig up  trenches for fibre optic cable in exchange for shares in the network. See ISPreview, “B4RN Set to Hit 5000 Rural UK FTTH Broadband Connections Target”,  11 September 2018, available at https://www.ispreview.co.uk/index.php/2018/09/b4rn-set-to-hit-5000-rural-uk-ftth-broadband-connections-target. html 61 Alliance for Affordable Internet, available at https://a4ai.org/rethinking-affordable-access/  62 Written contribution, Centre for Socio-Economic Development. This does not take away from the tremendous role that digital technologies have played in  improving the lives of people with disabilities.  63 UNESCO, “Multilingualism in Cyberspace: Indigenous Languages for Empowerment”, 27-28 November 2015, available at http://www.unesco.org/new/ fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/Events/multilingualism_in_cyberspace_concept_paper_en.pdf; Brookings Institute, “Rural and urban America  divided by broadband access”, 18 July 2016, available at https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2016/07/18/rural-and-urban-america-divided-bybroadband-access/  64 ITU Facts and Figures 2017 , available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2017 .pdf  65 Pathways for Prosperity Commission, Digital Lives: Meaningful Connections for the Next 3 Billion, 2018, available at https://pathwayscommission.bsg. ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2018-11/digital_lives_report.pdf  66 Recognising the importance of marketing in addressing socio-cultural issues, the Unstereotype alliance, an initiative convened by UN Women, unites  leaders from across business technology and creative industries to use marketing-based techniques to combat gender stereotypes. Available at http:// www.unstereotypealliance.org/en/about 67 The OECD and WTO-led inter-agency Task Force on International Trade Statistics is one example of work being undertaken by the OECD and others to  update traditional metrics of macroeconomic change and trade flows (OECD, Toward a Framework for Measuring the Digital Economy, 19-21 September  2018). The G20 Toolkit for Measuring the Digital Economy identifies methodologies to measure the digital economy as well as gaps and challenges  surrounding measurement; (G20 Digital Economy Ministerial Declaration, available at http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2018/2018-08-24-digital. html#annex3). The ITU’s ICT Development Index (IDI) measures the level and evolution over time of ICT developments across developed and developing  countries (available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis/methodology.aspx). The EIU Index covers 100 countries as of  2019 using benchmarks of national digital inclusion across readiness, relevance, affordability, and availability (Ibid). 68 The World Bank, World Development Report: The Changing Nature of Work, 2019. 69 Thereza Balliester and Adam Elsheikhi, “The Future of Work: A Literature Review”, March 2018, available at https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--dgreports/---inst/documents/publication/wcms_625866.pdf 70 Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael A. Osborne, The Future Of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs To Computerisation? (Oxford Martin School, 2013),  available at https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf 71 Towards data science, “Humanities Graduates Should Consider Data Science”, 31 August 2017 , available at https://towardsdatascience.com/ humanities-graduates-should-consider-data-science-d9fc78735b0c 72 Tim Noonan, Director, International Trade Union Confederation, interview, 25 January 2019. 73 CNBC, “The future of work won't be about college degrees, it will be about job skills”, 31 October 2018, available at https://www.cnbc.com/2018/10/31/ the-future-of-work-wont-be-about-degrees-it-will-be-about-skills.html 74 The Guardian, “All flexibility, no security: why conservative think tanks are wrong on the gig economy”, 23 January 2019, available on https://www. theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2019/jan/24/all-flexibility-no-security-why-conservative-thinktanks-are-wrong-on-the-gig-economy 75 International Labour Organization, “Helping the gig economy work better for gig workers”, available at https://www.ilo.org/washington/WCMS_642303/ lang--en/index.htm 76 Klaus Schoemann, “Digital Technology to Support the Trade Union Movement”, Open Journal of Social Sciences, Vol. 06 No. 01 (2018), available at  https://file.scirp.org/Html/5-1761684_81823.htm 77 WIPO, “The informal economy in developing nations: a hidden engine of growth”, June 2017 , available at https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/ en/2017/03/article_0006.html 78 OECD, “Tax and Digitalisation”, March 2019, available at www.oecd.org/going-digital/tax-and-digitalisation.pdf             79 South Center, “The WTO’s Discussions on Electronic Commerce”, January 2017 , available at https://www.southcentre.int/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/ AN_TDP_2017 _2_The-WTO%E2%80%99s-Discussions-on-Electronic-Commerce_EN.pdf 80 European Commission, "76 WTO partners launch talks on e-commerce", 25 January 2019, available at http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index. cfm?id=1974 81 UNCTAD, Trade and Development Report 2018: Power, Platforms and the Free Trade Delusion, Chapter III. 82 OECD, “Vectors of Digital Transformation” (OECD Publishing, Paris, 22 January 2019). 83 Michael Mandel, Data, Trade and Growth, Progressive Policy Institute, April 2014, available at https://www.progressivepolicy.org/wp-content/ uploads/2014/04/2014.04-Mandel_Data-Trade-and-Growth.pdf 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 4384 Parminder Jeet Singh, “Digital Industrialisation in Developing Countries”, paper for the Commonwealth Secretariat, 2018. 85 OECD, “Tax and Digitalisation”, March 2019, available at www.oecd.org/going-digital/tax-and-digitalisation.pdf 86 OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Shifting Project, Tax Challenges Arising from Digitalisation, Interim report 2018, available at: https://read.oecd-library.org/ taxation/tax-challenges-arising-from-digitalisation-interim-report_9789264293083-en#page3; Esquire, “Silicon Valley’s Tax-Avoiding, Job-Killing,  Soul-Sucking Machine”, available at https://www.esquire.com/news-politics/a15895746/bust-big-tech-silicon-valley/ 87 OECD, Base Erosion and Profit Shifting, available at https://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/ 88 Bloomberg Tax, “What’s Next for Countries Going it Alone on Digital Taxes”, 21 March, 2019, available at https://news.bloombergtax.com/daily-taxreport-international/whats-next-for-countries-going-it-alone-on-digital-tax 89 KPMG, “Taxation of Digital Assets: New Laws Issued”, 15 May 2018, available at https://home.kpmg/xx/en/home/insights/2018/05/tax-news-flashissue-380.html 90 Jean Tirole, “Regulating Disrupters”, Project Syndicate, 9 January 2019, available at www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/regulating-the-disrupters-byjean-tirole-2019-01?barrier=accesspaylog. 91 For more on these processes, see Jean Tirole, Economics for the Common Good (Princeton University Press, 2016). 92 Since 1979, the International Conference of Data Protection & Privacy Commissioners (ICDPPC) has provided a forum for connecting the efforts of 122  data protection and privacy authorities from across the globe; and since 2001, the International Competition Network (ICN) has provided a specialised  yet informal venue for maintaining regular dialogue across the global antitrust community to build procedural and substantive convergence and  address practical competition concerns for the benefit of consumers and economies. 93 The National Institute for Transparency, Access to Information and Personal Data Protection (INAI) is an autonomous constitutional body responsible  for upholding the right to access to public information. It is also in charge of upholding the right to protection of personal data held by the public and  the private sectors. See http://www.networkforintegrity.org/continents/america/instituto-nacional-de-transparencia-acceso-a-la-informacion-yproteccion-de-datos-personales-inai/ 94 OECD, “Strengthening digital government”, OECD Going Digital Policy Note, OECD Paris, March 2019, available at www.oecd.org/going-digital/ strengthening-digital-government.pdf 95 See Creators, available at https://www.creatorspad.com/pages/govtech-program 96 Infocomm Media Development Corporation, available at https://www.imda.gov.sg/imtalent/training-and-courses 97 Minister Omar Al Olama, Remarks at the World Government Summit, 10 February 2019. 98 The Verge, “The mass shooting in New Zealand was designed to spread on social media”, 15 March 2019, available on https://www.theverge. com/2019/3/15/18266859/new-zealand-shooting-video-social-media-manipulation      99 Myanmar went from minimal connectivity in 2013 to virtually half the population in 2016 owning smartphones. Facebook became the dominant  communications platform almost by accident. See Reuters, “Why Facebook is losing the war on hate speech in Myanmar”, 15 August 2018, available at  https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/myanmar-facebook-hate/  100 National Public Radio, "#Gamergate Controversy Fuels Debate On Women And Video Games", 24 September 2014, available at https://www.npr.org/ sections/alltechconsidered/2014/09/24/349835297/-gamergate-controversy-fuels-debate-on-women-and-video-games 101 The Guardian, “Instagram bans 'graphic' self-harm images after Molly Russell's death”, 7 February 2019, available at https://www.theguardian.com/ technology/2019/feb/07/instagram-bans-graphic-self-harm-images-after-molly-russells-death   102 Hindustan Times, “24-yr-old commits suicide after being bullied for dressing up as a woman”, 19 October 2019, available at   https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/24-yr-old-commits-suicide-after-being-bullied-for-dressing-up-as-a-woman/story8PlWvf0fMwcd72A5Tp8tBI.html   103 Ofcom and UK Information Commissioner’s Office, “Internet users’ experience of harm online: summary of survey research”, July 2018, available at  https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0018/120852/Internet-harm-research-2018-report.pdf 104 NSPCC, “Net Aware report 2017: ‘Freedom to express myself safely’”, 04 September 2018, available at https://learning.nspcc.org.uk/researchresources/2017/net-aware-report-2017-freedom-to-express-myself-safely/  105 India alone had over 100 incidents in 2018. See Freedom House, “Freedom on the Net 2018”, October 2018, available at https://freedomhouse.org/ sites/default/files/FOTN_2018_Final%20Booklet_11_1_2018.pdf  106 United Nations, Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, “Human Rights Appeal 2019”, 17 January 2019, available at https://www.ohchr.org/ Documents/Publications/AnnualAppeal2019.pdf  107 Electronic Frontier Foundation, “India's Supreme Court Upholds Right to Privacy as a Fundamental Right”, 27 August 2017 , available at https://www.eff. org/deeplinks/2017/08/indias-supreme-court-upholds-right-privacy-fundamental-right-and-its-about-time  108 Written contribution, the Paradigm Initiative. The bill has not received presidential assent. 109 United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Global Compact, Save the Children, “Children’s Rights and Business Principles”, 03 March 2012, available  at https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/issues_doc/human_rights/CRBP/Childrens_Rights_and_Business_Principles.pdf  110 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, “Steering AI and Advanced ICTs for  Knowledge Societies”, available at https://en.unesco.org/system/files/unesco-steering_ai_for_knowledge_societies.pdf 111  Council of Europe, Freedom of Expression, Standard Setting, available at https:/www.coe.int/en/web/freedom-expression/internet-standardsetting; and European Court of Human Rights decisions, for example, in the case of Ahmet Yildirim v. Turkey, available at https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/ eng#{%22itemid%22:[%22001-115705%22]}  112 IFEX, “Saudi Arabia arrests at least 13 more human rights defenders”, 14 April 2019. 113 UN Global Compact “Guiding Principles for Business and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy” Framework”,  2011, available at https://www.unglobalcompact.org/library/2   
The Age of Digital Interdependence 44114 The Business & Human Rights Resource Centre, available at https://www.business-humanrights.org/    115 A Corporate Accountability Index is published annually by Ranking Digital Rights. Available at https://rankingdigitalrights.org/  116 Carnegie UK Trust, “Reducing harm in social media through a duty of care”, 08 May 2018, available at https://www.carnegieuktrust.org.uk/blog/ reducing-harm-social-media-duty-care/ 117  Pew Research Trust, “Online Harassment 2017”, 11 July 2017 , available at https://www.pewinternet.org/2017/07/11/online-harassment-2017/ 118 Amanda and Noel Sharkey, “Granny and the robots: ethical issues in robot care for the elderly”, University of Sheffield, 03 July 2010. 119 United Nations Children’s Fund, “One in Three: Internet Governance and Children’s Rights”, discussion paper, 2016. 120 U.S. Government Publishing Office, “Electronic Code of Federal Regulation”, 26 April 2019, available at https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=49 39e77c77a1a1a08c1cbf905fc4b409&node=16%3A1.0.1.3.36&rgn=div5; UK Information Commissioner’s Office, “Age appropriate design: a code of  practice for online services”, 15 April 2019, available at https://ico.org.uk/media/about-the-ico/consultations/2614762/age-appropriate-design-codefor-public-consultation.pdf  121 Elon University, “Survey X: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Humans”, 2018, available at  http://www.elon.edu/e-web/imagining/surveys/2018_survey/AI_and_the_Future_of_Humans.xhtml  122 Pedro Domingos, The Master Algorithm: How the quest for the ultimate learning machine will remake our world (Basic Books, 2015). 123 Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction (The Crown Publishing Group, 2016); Digital Society, “Human rights in the robot age - Challenges arising from  the use of robotics, artificial intelligence, and virtual and augmented reality”, 11 October 2017; Umoja Noble, “Algorithms of Oppression – How Search  Engines Reinforce Racism”, 08 January 2018, available at https://nyupress.org/9781479837243/algorithms-of-oppression/  124 Investors and founders are finally waking up to the gender problem in tech after high-profile scandals and walkouts by employees at companies such as  Google. See Aliya Ram, “Tech investors put #MeToo clauses in deals”, Financial Times, 22 March 2019. 125 Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (St. Martin's Press, 2018); excerpt available at https:// us.macmillan.com/excerpt?isbn=9781250074317  126 Harvard Law Today, “Algorithms and their unintended consequences for the poor”, 07 November 2018, available at https://today.law.harvard.edu/ algorithms-and-their-unintended-consequences-for-the-poor/? fbclid=IwAR2yLUMpEYj8YKhvZDQktU0LNHNDateRtqVBgZHW45uHMEYubyQr36h08H8  127 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, “Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision for Prioritizing Human Well-being with Autonomous and Intelligent  Systems”, available at https://standards.ieee.org/content/dam/ieee-standards/standards/web/documents/other/ead_v2.pdf 128 One important discussion is on the applicability of International Humanitarian Law and accountability thereunder for the use of military systems that  might deploy AI. See Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively  Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects, “Report of the 2018 session of the Group of Governmental Experts on Emerging Technologies in the Area of  Lethal Autonomous Weapons Systems”, 23 October 2018, available at https://undocs.org/en/CCW/GGE.1/2018/3   129 Wendell Wallach, An Agile Ethical/Legal Model for the International and National Governance of AI and Robotics (Association for the Advancement of  Artificial Intelligence, 2018). 130 António Guterres, United Nations Secretary-General, remarks at the Web Summit, Lisbon, 05 November 2018, available at https://www.un.org/sg/en/ content/sg/speeches/2018-11-05/remarks-web-summit; “Autonomous weapons that kill must be banned, insists UN chief”, March 29, 2019, available  at https://news.un.org/en/story/2019/03/1035381  131 Provisions similar to the U.S. Fourth Amendment exist in several Constitutions and the 1980 OECD Guidelines codified 8 principles that have influenced  privacy regulations since then. These were updated in 2013 as Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Trans-border Flows of Personal Data and are  available at https://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd_privacy_framework.pdf  132 David Dodwell, “The integration of mass surveillance and new digital technologies is unnerving”, The South China Morning Post, 17 February 2018,  available at https://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/2133617/integration-mass-surveillance-and-new-digital-technologies; United  Nations General Assembly, Summary of the Human Rights Council penal discussion on the right to privacy in the digital age, 19 December 2014.  133 The 2016 Privacy Shield framework (earlier Safe Harbor), which governs personal data flows between the U.S. and the E.U. and Switzerland based on  self-certification by companies, is an example of the former; available at https://www.privacyshield.gov/welcome  134 National Public Radio, “A year after San Bernadino and Apple-FBI, where are we on encryption?”, 3 December 2016, available at https://www.npr.org/ sections/alltechconsidered/2016/12/03/504130977/a-year-after-san-bernardino-and-apple-fbi-where-are-we-on-encryption?t=1532518316108 135 For example, Australia’s Telecommunications and Other Legislation Amendment (Assistance and Access) Act 2018, available at https://www.legislation. gov.au/Details/C2018A00148  136 U.S. Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data Act (CLOUD Act, H.R. 4943). 137 Brave automatically blocks ad trackers (ad trackers collect data from users’ online behaviours for the purpose of boosting the effectiveness of ads and  marketing campaigns). DuckDuckGo does not track user search behaviours.  138 UK Open Data Institute, “UK’s first ‘data trust’ pilots to be led by the ODI in partnership with central and local government”, 20 November 2018, available  at https://theodi.org/article/uks-first-data-trust-pilots-to-be-led-by-the-odi-in-partnership-with-central-and-local-government/  139 India Stack, “About Data Empowerment and Protection Architecture”, available at https://indiastack.org/depa/  140 United Nations Secretary-General, Address to the General Assembly, 25 September 2018, available at https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/ speeches/2018-09-25/address-73rd-general-assembly 141  Mareike Möhlmann and Andrea Geissinger, Trust in the Sharing Economy: Platform-Mediated Peer Trust ( Cambridge University Press, July 2018),  available at https://www.researchgate.net/publication/326346569_Trust_in_the_Sharing_Economy_Platform-Mediated_Peer_Trust 142 European Political Strategy Centre, “Report from the High Level-Hearing: Preserving Democracy in the Digital Age”, 22 February 2018, available at  https://ec.europa.eu/epsc/sites/epsc/files/epsc_-_report_-_hearing_on_preserving_democracy_in_the_digital_age.pdf  143 The Guardian, “You thought fake news was bad? Deep fakes are where truth goes die”, 12 November 2018, available at: https://www.theguardian.com/
The Age of Digital Interdependence 45technology/2018/nov/12/deep-fakes-fake-news-truth 144 Kai-Fu Lee, AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order (Houghton Miller Harcourt, 2018), available at https://aisuperpowers.com/  145 Here capacity is understood as “the ability of people, organizations, systems of organizations, and society as a whole to define and solve problems,  make informed choices, order their priorities, plan their futures, and to implement programmes and projects to sustain them.” See Swiss Agency of  Development and Cooperation, “Glossary Knowledge Management and Capacity Development”, available at https://bit.ly/2FwORDl   146 5Rights Foundation, “5Rights Partner with BT to Co-Create with Children on Digital Literacy”, 2017 , available at https://5rightsfoundation.com/inaction/5rights-partner-with-bt-to-co-create-with-children-on-digital-literacy.html  147 United Nations Volunteers, “Shape the Future of Volunteering: Online Conversations”, 25 April 2019, available at https://www.unv.org/planofaction/ dialogues   148 The Times of India, “Fake news: WhatsApp, DEF host training for community leaders in Jaipur”, 19 November 2018. 149 The “security by design” approach is described in the 2015 White Paper of Amazon Web Services, available at https://www.logicworks.com/wp-content/ uploads/2017/01/Intro_to_Security_by_Design.pdf; the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) contains the “privacy by design” principle;  some examples of what it means in practice are available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-andorganisations/obligations/what-does-data-protection-design-and-default-mean_en. 150 European Commission, Final Report of the High Level Expert Group on Fake News and Online Disinformation, 12 March 2018, available at https:// ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/final-report-high-level-expert-group-fake-news-and-online-disinformation; Facebook, “Protecting  Elections in the EU”, 28 March 2019.  151 See for example Joseph Nye, “Nuclear Learning and U.S.-Soviet security regimes”, International Organization, 41, 3, (1987), p. 371-402; Emmanuel  Adler, “The emergence of cooperation: national epistemic communities and the international evolution of the idea of nuclear arms control”, International  Organization, 46, (1992), p. 101-145; Clifton Parker, “Cooperation of U.S., Russian Scientists Helped Avoid Nuclear Catastrophe at Cold War’s End, CISAC  Scholar Says”, June 28, 2016, available at https://cisac.fsi.stanford.edu/news/cooperation-us-russian-scientists-helped-avoid-nuclear-catastrophecold-war%E2%80%99s-end-says-cisac  152 World Economic Forum, The Global Risks Report 2019, 15 January 2019, available at https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2019  153 World Economic Forum Global Risks Perception Survey 2018-2019. 154 WIRED, “That Insane, $81m Bangladesh Bank Heist? Here's What We Know”, 17 May 2016, available at https://www.wired.com/2016/05/insane-81mbangladesh-bank-heist-heres-know/  155 CBS, “What can we learn from the ‘most devastating’ cyberattack in history?”, 22 August 2018, available at https://www.cbsnews.com/news/lessonsto-learn-from-devastating-notpetya-cyberattack-wired-investigation/  156 Bromium, Inc., “Hyper-Connected Web Of Profit Emerges, As Global Cybercriminal Revenues Hit $1.5 Trillion Annually”, 20 August 2018, available at  https://www.bromium.com/press-release/hyper-connected-web-of-profit-emerges-as-global-cybercriminal-revenues-hit-1-5-trillion-annually/ 157 Business Insider, “Travis Kalanick lasted in his role for 6.5 years — five times longer than the average Uber employee”, 20 August 2017 , available at  https://www.businessinsider.com/employee-retention-rate-top-tech-companies-2017-8  158 Symantec, Internet Security Threat Report, April 2016, available at https://www.nu.nl/files/nutech/Rapport-Symantec2016.pdf 159 Europol’s Internet Organised Crime Threat Assessment (IOCTA) 2018 has a summary of the evolving threat environment; Japan’s National Institute of  Information and Communications Technology (NICT) estimates on the basis of scans of the darknet that 54% of the attacks it detected in 2017 targeted  IoT devices: see NICT, “The ‘NOTICE’ Project to Survey IoT Devices and to Alert Users”, 1 February 2019. 160 IOT Analytics, “State of the IoT 2018, Number of IoT devices now at 7B – Market accelerating”, 08 August 2018, available at https://iot-analytics.com/ state-of-the-iot-update-q1-q2-2018-number-of-iot-devices-now-7b/     161 CBS, “Stuxnet: Computer Worm Opens Era of Warfare”, 04 June 2012, available at https://www.cbsnews.com/news/stuxnet-computer-worm-opensnew-era-of-warfare-04-06-2012/  162 CNN, “US announces new set of Russia Sanctions”, 20 December 2018, available at https://edition.cnn.com/2018/12/19/politics/us-treasuryrussia/index.html; The New York Times, “Signs of Russian Meddling in Brexit Referendum”, 15 November 2017 , available at https://www.nytimes. com/2017/11/15/world/europe/russia-brexit-twitter-facebook.html  163 Gail Kent, Stanford Law School Center for Internet and Society, “The Mutual Legal Assistance Problem Explained”, 23 February 2015, available at http:// cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2015/02/mutual-legal-assistance-problem-explained    164 Bloomberg, “Huawei Reveals the Real Trade War with China”, 6 December 2018; Associated Press, “German leader Angela Merkel testifies on alleged U.S.  surveillance revealed by Snowden, 16 February 2017 and “Costs of Snowden leak still mounting 5 years later”, 4 June 2018. 165 TechRepublic, “Governments and nation states are now officially training for cyberwarfare: An inside look”, 1 September 2016, available at https://www. techrepublic.com/article/governments-and-nation-states-are-now-officially-training-for-cyberwarfare-an-inside-look/   166 The Wall Street Journal, “Cyberwar Ignites a New Arms Race”, 11 October 2015; The Wall Street Journal, “Cataloging the World’s Cyberforces”, 11 October  2015.  167 The Register, “Everything you need to know about the Petya, er, NotPetya nasty trashing PCs worldwide”, 28 June 2017 .  168 IBM researchers have shown it is possible to conceal known malware in video-conferencing software and trigger it when it sees a specific individual,  available at https://securityintelligence.com/deeplocker-how-ai-can-power-a-stealthy-new-breed-of-malware/  169 Russia placed information security on the agenda of the UN in 1998. Since then several Groups of Governmental Experts have studied ICT security and  three of them have adopted reports by consensus. See https://www.un.org/disarmament/ict-security/ and https://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/ paris_call_cyber_cle443433-1.pdf  170 They are composed on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, and each has included the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.  171 UN GGE report of 2013 (A/68/98), paragraph 19, available at https://undocs.org/A/68/98; reconfirmed by the UN GGE report of 2015 (A/70/174), 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 46paragraph 24, available at https://undocs.org/A/70/174 172 United Nations General Assembly, Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context  of International Security, report A/70/174, page 13, 22 July 2015, available at http://undocs.org/A/70/174   173 Government of France, “Cybersecurity: Paris Call of 12 November 2018 for Trust and Security in Cyberspace”, available at https://www.diplomatie.gouv. fr/en/french-foreign-policy/digital-diplomacy/france-and-cyber-security/article/cybersecurity-paris-call-of-12-november-2018-for-trust-and-securityin 174  Cybersecurity Tech Accord, available at https://cybertechaccord.org; Siemens, Charter of Trust, available at https://www.siemens.com/press/pool/de/ feature/2018/corporate/2018-02-cybersecurity/charter-of-trust-e.pdf   175 The case has been made strongly in recent studies such as Samir Saran (ed.), Our Common Digital Future (GCCS and ORF, 2017), available at https:// www.orfonline.org/research/our-common-digital-future-gccs-2017/  176 United Nations General Assembly, “Advancing responsible State behaviour in cyberspace in the context of international security”, 18 October 2018,  available at https://undocs.org/A/C.1/73/L.37   177 United National General Assembly, “Developments in the field of information and telecommunications in the context of international security”, 29  October 2019, available at https://undocs.org/A/C.1/73/L.27/Rev.1   178 Oman ITU-Arab Regional Cybersecurity Centre, available at https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Cybersecurity/Pages/Global-Partners/oman-itu-arab-regionalcybersecurity-centre.aspx   179 CSIRTs Network, available at https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/csirts-in-europe/csirts-network  180 Cathy Mulligan, “A Call to (Software) Arms”, LinkedIn, 30 March 2019.  181 International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 27034, 2011; SAFECode, Fundamental Practices for Secure Software Development, March 2018,  available at https://safecode.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/SAFECode_Fundamental_Practices_for_Secure_Software_Development_March_2018. pdf; SAFECode, Managing Security Risks Inherent in the Use of Third-Party Components, 2017 , available at https://www.safecode.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/05/SAFECode_TPC_Whitepaper.pdf; SAFECode, Tactical Threat Modeling, 2017 , available at https://www.safecode.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/05/SAFECode_TM_Whitepaper.pdf; and Microsoft, Security Development Lifecycle. Microsoft, available at https://www.microsoft.com/ en-us/securityengineering/sdl. 182 The Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre at Oxford University has created a repository of existing efforts in partnership with the GFCE: the  Cybersecurity Capacity Portal, available at https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecurity-capacity/explore/gfce. The report “Cybersecurity Competence  Building Trends” provides examples of public-private partnerships in OECD countries: see Diplo, Cybersecurity Competence Building Trends, 2016. 183 Cybersecurity Ventures, “Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021”, 31 May 2017 , available at https://cybersecurityventures.com/jobs/. The Delhi  Communiqué on a GFCE Global Agenda for Cyber Capacity Building provides a framework for such efforts: see GFCE, Delhi Communiqué, 2017 , available  at https://www.thegfce.com/delhi-communique 184 OECD, “Unlocking the potential of e-commerce”, OECD Going Digital Policy Note, OECD, Paris, 2019, available at www.oecd.org/going-digital/unlockingthe-potential-of-e-commerce.pdf. Page 2 notes that “SMEs could also benefit from multistakeholder initiatives such as the Electronic World Trade  Platform, which aims to foster a more effective policy environment for online trading”.  185 In the areas of cybersecurity and cybercrime, for example, national laws and regional and international conventions create frameworks for digital  cooperation in addressing cyber-risks. One example is the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention, available at https://www.coe.int/en/web/ conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/185 186 Content policy is one area where there are many examples of “soft law” instruments, such as the “Code of conduct on countering illegal hate speech  online” (agreed in 2016 by the European Commission and major internet companies; available at https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/just/item-detail. cfm?item_id=54300), the “Manila Principles on Internet Intermediaries” (developed in 2015 by the Electronic Frontier Foundation and other civil society  groups and endorsed by many entities, available at https://www.manilaprinciples.org), and the “Guidelines for industry on child protection online”  (initially developed in 2015 through a consultative process led by the International Telecommunication Union and UNICEF, available at https://www. unicef.org/csr/files/COP_Guidelines_English.pdf). 187 The Internet Governance Forum can be seen as a loosely organised framework for digital cooperation (more details at https://www.intgovforum.org/ multilingual/tags/about), while the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (with its multiple advisory committees and supporting  organisations) can be seen as a more institutionalised framework (more details at https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/groups-2012-02-06-en). 188 The Internet Engineering Task Force, for example, develops technical standards for the internet (more details at https://www.ietf.org/standards/), while  the European Commission’s High Level Group on Internet Governance has the role of facilitating coordination among EU member states on internet  governance issues (more details at http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regexpert/index.cfm?do=groupDetail.groupDetail&groupID=2450). 189 See Anderson, C., Cyber Security and the Need for International Governance (Southern University Law Center 24 April 2016).  190 Paragraph 72 of the WSIS Agenda lists this and other functions of the IGF. Available at https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html 191 NETmundial, “NETmundial Multistakeholder Statement”, April 2014, available at http://netmundial.br/netmundial-multistakeholder-statement/ 192 Global Commission on Internet Governance, “One Internet”, June 2016, available at https://www.cigionline.org/publications/one-internet 193 World Wide Web Foundation, “Contract for the Web”, available at https://contractfortheweb.org 194 Government of France, “France and Canada Create new Expert International Panel on Artificial Intelligence”, 7 December 2018, available at https://www. gouvernement.fr/en/france-and-canada-create-new-expert-international-panel-on-artificial-intelligence 195 In 2016, at the G20 Summit in Hangzhou the G20 leaders adopted a “G20 Digital Economy Development and Cooperation Initiative”, available at https:// www.mofa.go.jp/files/000185874.pdf. Annual G20 Digital Economy Ministerial Meetings have been held since 2017 . 196 UN Secretary-General António Guterres, Address to the Internet Governance Forum 2018, available at http://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/ igf-2018-address-to-the-internet-governance-forum-by-un-sg-antónio-guterres 
The Age of Digital Interdependence 47197 Many documents and publications released over the past decade underline the need for better inclusion of underrepresented communities in internet  governance and digital policy processes. Examples include the report of the Working Group on Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum, 2012,  available at https://unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/a67d65_en.pdf, and the NetMundial Multistakeholder Statement, 2014, available  at http://netmundial.br/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/NETmundial-Multistakeholder-Document.pdf. ICANN has also recognised the need for better  inclusion of under-represented communities and is working on addressing this through initiatives such as its Fellowship Program (more details at  https://www.icann.org/fellowshipprogram). 198 According to the updated estimate of the 2014 UNCTAD study, there are more than 680 digital cooperation mechanisms developed and used by  governments, businesses, technical and international organisations. See United Nations Commission Mapping of International Internet Public Policy  Issues, E/CN.16/2015/CRP.2, 17 April 2015, available at https://unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/ecn162015crp2_en.pdf 199 One recent example is the impact of the introduction of the GDPR on ICANN’s policies concerning the collection and publication of domain name  registration data. When the GDPR requested that data on EU registrants be made private, ICANN was unprepared to adapt its so-called WHOIS policies to  the new EU regulation. A coordination mechanism for interdisciplinary policy approaches could have helped ICANN be better prepared for the GDPR. 200 CSIS, “Economic Impact of Cybercrime – No Slowing Down”, February 2018, available at https://csis-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/publication/ economic-impact-cybercrime.pdf  201 Cybersecurity Ventures, 2017 Cybercrime Report, 2017 . 202 Digital Full Potential, “Artificial Intelligence Market Size Projected to Be $60 Billion by 2025”. 203 MarketWatch, “The Global Artificial Intelligence (AI) Market by Technology and Industry Vertical - A $169.4 Billion Opportunity by 2025 -  ResearchAndMarkets.com”, 24 August 2018.  204 WSIS, available at https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/; UNESCO ROAM Principles, available at https://en.unesco.org/internetuniversality/indicators;  NETmundial, available at https://netmundial.org/ 205 The IGF Plus proposal builds on previous policy and academic discussions on strengthening the Internet Governance Forum, including: Report of  the Working Group on Improvements to the Internet Governance Forum, 2012, available at https://unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/ a67d65_en.pdf; Milton Mueller and Ben Wagner, “Finding a Formula for Brazil: Representation and Legitimacy in Internet Governance,” Internet Policy  Observatory, February 2014, available at https://global.asc.upenn.edu/app/uploads/2014/09/Finding-a-Formula-for-Brazil-Representation-andLegitimacy-in-Internet-Governance.pdf; IGF Retreat Proceedings: Advancing the 10-Year Mandate of the Internet Governance Forum, July 2016, New  York, available at https://www.intgovforum.org/multilingual/content/igf-retreat-documents; Wolfgang Kleinwächter, "The Start of a New Beginning: The  Internet Governance Forum on Its Road to 2025", CircleID, 3 April 2016, available at http://www.circleid.com/posts/20160403_start_of_a_new_beginning_ the_internet_governance_forum/; Raúl Echeberría, "Let’s Reform the IGF to Ensure Its Healthy Future", Internet Society blog, 17 March 2018, available  at https://www.internetsociety.org/blog/2018/03/lets-reform-igf-ensure-healthy-future/; the WSIS Tunis Agenda for the Information Society, Tunis,  United Nations, available at https://www.itu.int/net/wsis/docs2/tunis/off/6rev1.html. In addition to the IGF, the other outcomes of the WSIS process are  action line follow-ups (WSIS Forum), system-wide follow-up (UN CSTD), and enhanced cooperation. 206 As of 31 May 2019 there were 82 national, 17 regional and 16 youth Internet Governance Forums. 207 This approach was developed by the World Bank and 4IRC. In Singapore, the Technology Office of the Prime Minister developed mechanisms that enable  continuity, dialogue, feedback loops, and agility in decision-making, particularly in relation to experimentation or piloting of new technologies. 208 On the applicability of the concept of global public good to the internet please refer to https://www.diplomacy.edu/calendar/internet-global-publicresource 209 Malta proposed that the UN consider the internet as a common heritage of mankind. See  Statement by Dr. Alex Sceberras Trigona, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of Malta, World Summit on Information Society Review Process, New York,  15 November 2015, available at https://www.academia.edu/19974250/Protecting_the_Internet_as_Common_Heritage_of_Mankind 210 The data commons idea has emerged over the past year at the ITU’s AI for Good Summit and the World Government Summit. See https://news.itu.int/ roadmap-zero-to-ai-and-data-commons/ and http://the-levant.com/uae-world-leader-ai-global-data-commons-roundtable 211 Members of the International Chamber of Commerce pay an annual membership fee, set either by ICC national committees (where they exist) or by the  ICC itself (for direct members). More details at https://iccwbo.org/become-a-member/joining-icc-direct-member/   212 United Nations Secretary-General’s Task Force on Digital Financing of the SDGs, available at https://digitalfinancingtaskforce.org/ 213 One of the first regulatory sandboxes was launched in 2015 in the UK; at the beginning of 2018, there were more than 20 jurisdictions actively  implementing or exploring the concept. See Briefing by UN Secretary-General’s Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance, available at https://www.unsgsa. org/files/1915/3141/8033/Sandbox.pdf  214 We understand ‘inclusion’ to be more than simple participation of a few ‘missing actors’ in digital events. Meaningful representation requires bottom-up  capacity development, preparatory discussions and inter-ministerial coordination at the national level.
