AI Procurement in a Box:   Project overviewUnlocking Public Sector AI  TOOLKIT JUNE 2020
2    AI Procurement in a Box: Project overviewContents 1  Foreword 2 Introduction 2.1 What is AI Procurement in a Box? 2.2 How did we get here? 2.3 How do you use the AI Procurement in a Box? 3 Acknowledgements3 4 4 6 8 9 
AI Procurement in a Box: Project overview    3Foreword The promises of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies  are literally beyond the capacity of our imagination.  The risks that accompany these developments are  also impossible to predict. At this pivotal moment  in the adoption of AI by governments globally, there  is an opportunity to establish a set of actionable  procurement guidelines to enable good decisionmaking that can also be evaluated.    Government procurement officials cannot be  expected to have the most up-to-date knowledge  in every highly specialized field. To safeguard  the responsible future use of AI technologies,  a multistakeholder effort with cross-sector  participation and interdisciplinary expertise is  required to create authoritative guidelines. The  procedural norms are even more urgent now.  What information should be recorded and how  explanations need to be documented is what lays  the foundation for fairness and impartiality in the  administrative process. To preserve due process  and predictability, a coalition can help ensure that  the right questions are asked. The Forum offers the Procurement in a Box   package, a pragmatic guidebook to unlock  public-sector adoption of AI through government  procurement. This was the aspiration of our project.  This work offers a set of complementary tools to  demonstrate the emerging global consensus on the  responsible deployment of AI technologies.  The Procurement in a Box project has taken shape  at a time when the social contract between the  government, its citizens, and their industries is  suspended and is about to reset. The COVID-19  pandemic has further emphasized the imperative  for responsible innovation and the ethical use of  technology. We now know how vulnerable an  interdependent world can be. Solving complex societal problems with pattern recognition and  predictive algorithms is an integral part of the new  social contract. The scenarios of how government may use  AI technologies is already taking place. For  example, chat bots are increasingly being used  by government agencies to effectively manage  overwhelming inquiries from the general public,  but have also increased the concern that sensitive  information about people may be misused in the  future. Similarly, applying predictive policing to help  manage law enforcement has helped fight crime, but  has also exposed the bias and discrimination that  are embedded in society. Setting standards to obtain essential information  and create cooperative relationships can have a  profound impact on mitigating these harms. AI  technologies demand special attention because  automated processes amplify and propagate  bias swiftly and these technologies are growing  in prominence. The Procurement in a Box offers  important guidance to help prepare for the future. This project has helped identify useful mechanisms  to inform technology policy in the Fourth Industrial  Revolution. Shaping the norms for AI procurement  in the public sector will significantly influence best  practice in the rest of the market and throughout  the industry. The recommendations and supporting  material in this package are intended to be put into  practice. The resources are available publicly as a  “living document” to encourage wide adoption as  well as ensure the guidelines evolve with insights  from a range of trials.  The Forum looks forward to continuing to work  together to keep AI technologies and their use  responsible and ethical. Shelby Austin  Managing Partner,   Growth and Investments   and Omnia AI, DeloitteSana Khareghani  Head of the Office for AI,  United Kingdom GovernmentKay Firth-Butterfield  Head, Artificial Intelligence and Machine  Learning, Member of the Executive  Committee, World Economic Forum 1 
4    AI Procurement in a Box: Project overviewIntroduction2 AI Procurement in a Box is a practical guide that  helps governments rethink the procurement of  artificial intelligence (AI) with a focus on innovation,  efficiency and ethics. Developing a new approach  to the acquisition of emerging technologies such  as AI will not only accelerate the adoption of AI in  the administration, but also drive the development  of ethical standards in AI development and  deployment. Innovative procurement approaches  have the potential to foster innovation, create  competitive markets for AI systems and uphold  public trust in the public-sector adoption of AI. AI has the potential to vastly improve government  operations and meet the needs of citizens in  new ways, ranging from intelligently automating  administrative processes to generating insights for  public policy developments and improving public  service delivery, for example, through personalized  healthcare. Many public institutions are lagging  behind in harnessing this powerful technology  because of challenges related to data, skills and  ethical deployment. Public procurement can be an important driver  of government adoption of AI. This means not  only ensuring that AI-driven technologies offering  the best value for money are purchased, but also  driving the ethical development and deployment of  innovative AI systems. Government as a powerful  market player can set standards when it comes  to the ethical development of technologies and has done so in cybersecurity and cloud policy in  recent decades. Public procurement has been  shown to deliver strategic goals in areas such  as environment and human rights and offers  an attractive tool for policy-makers to address  wider societal issues. Nevertheless, it is not  straightforward and careful development of  processes and incentives need to be considered to  achieve strategic maturity of commercial actions. These actions are more important than ever when  it comes to the adoption of AI. Failure to promote  ethical and technically robust considerations,  diversity and openness through AI procurement  may also lead to poor procurement decisions for AI  systems. This can limit accountability, undermine  social values, entrench the market power of large  businesses, decrease public trust and ultimately  slow digital transformation in the public sector. To help governments unlock the potential of  AI in the public sector the World Economic  Forum’s Centre for the Fourth Industrial  Revolution in collaboration with the Government  of the United Kingdom, Deloitte and Splunk  has created AI Procurement in a Box. This  practical guide helps policy-makers and  commercial teams rethink their approach to AI  procurement to more effectively and ethically  adopt AI technologies in the public sector.What is AI Procurement in a Box ? 2.1
AI Procurement in a Box: Project overview    5These are principle-based  guidelines for AI procurement  presenting the general  considerations to be taken when  procuring AI-powered solutions. This document summarizes  and analyses the pilot of the  guidelines carried out in the UK.This document is an overview  of the findings from workshops  conducted in Bahrain, the UAE  and the UK, which focused on  translating the guidelines from  theory into practice.Example decision criteria for  conducting an AI project risk  assessment. Examples of requirements to  include in an RFP and examples  of robust practices to look out for  when evaluating RFP responses. A selection of examples   from government and privatesector actors who have  procured AI previously.A slide pack summarizing  the agenda, content and  facilitation ideas for guidelines  implementation workshops.A set of questions that highlight  the main considerations that users  should be able to address when  implementing the guidelines.The workbook includes a  selection of instruments and  templates that sit alongside   the guidelines.The guidelines are an introduction to the most  important topics that need to be addressed  when reconsidering the approach to AI  procurement. They aim to help reshape public  procurement in the context of AI and are the  building blocks of the guide. The lessons learned are designed to provide  helpful tips for other organizations seeking to use  the guidelines.The workshop insights provide users with an  overview of the themes and important aspects to  consider when implementing the guidelines.This assessment can be a useful basis to  develop a proportionate approach to AI  procurement. Depending on the use case the  issues needed to be considered can vary. This should help procurement teams to draft  the RFP specification and evaluate the tender  responses. These examples seek to inspire public- and  private-sector actors to reconsider the way they  are procuring AI technologies.This workshop template gives ideas to workshop  facilitators on how to best design multistakeholder workshops for the implementation of  the guidelines.The questions seek to direct users through the  guidelines and prepare them for implementation.This is a summary of tools that aims to help  users with actively rethinking the approach to   AI procurement.01 0403a c edb02Guidelines for   government AI   procurement Pilot case studies  from the United  KingdomChallenges and  opportunities  during  implementationRisk assessment AI specification and  evaluation tool Case studiesWorkshop slide  pack: How to  kick-off the  implementationUser manualWorkbook for  policy and  procurement  officials Module Principles PurposeThe guide includes:
6    AI Procurement in a Box: Project overviewThe Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution is  a global hub of expertise, knowledge-sharing and  collaboration, based in San Francisco. The Centre  develops, pilots and scales up agile and humancentred governance tools that can be adopted by  policy-makers, legislators and regulators worldwide to  address challenges related to emerging technologies. Together with more than 200 stakeholders from  government, academia, the third sector and  business, the Centre created the AI Procurement in  a Box during the course of 15 months.How did we get here? 2.2 Project phases Challenges to government procurement of AI technologiesFIGURE 1 FIGURE 2 Scoping Key aims of this phase:  –Understanding   user needs  –Testing hypothesis on  how AI procurement  could be more ethical  and effectiveCo-creating Key aims of this phase:  –Drafting prototype  of the guidelines  for AI procurement  with the input from  a wide variety of  stakeholdersPiloting Key aims of this phase:  –Testing the guidelines  in real-world scenarios  –Iterating and further  developing the  guidelines to ensure  that they are usercentricScaling up Key aims of this phase:  –Governments  and public-sector  organizations around  the world rethink their  approach to the public  procurement of AI  with the help of the AI  Procurement in a Box  guide and share their  insights globally Scoping The team started by exploring the challenges  to government procurement. After two  workshops in San Francisco and London and following extensive consultation with experts  worldwide, five key challenges to government  procurement of AI were identified.  The lack of data sharing and data governance  in the public sector often leads to a lack of data  availability discoverability and usability. Since data  is currently often the basis of any AI development,  these challenges are a great barrier to AI adoption.  The team also discovered that sector officials may  lack the appropriate knowledge and expertise to  make strategic buying decisions for AI-powered  solutions. Uncertainty about ethical considerations  adds further layers of complexity. As a result, officials tend to delay buying decisions or reduce  perceived risk by purchasing solutions from large  and well-known suppliers. For a more detailed  description of the main roadblocks see here.  To address these challenges, the team agreed  to develop an overview of the important  drivers of more effective ethical public  procurement and ideas for policy-makers as  to how to incorporate these into action. Effective use of data Data and AI skills AI ecosystems Legacy cultureProcurement  mechanisms
AI Procurement in a Box: Project overview    7The team drafted the procurement principles,  which included the findings from the workshops,  consultations and input from more than 100  stakeholders from business, academia and  government. Comments were facilitated though  webinars, community calls, roundtables and  workshops, for example with 30 senior commercial  specialists from Central and Latin America hosted by  the Inter-American Development Bank. The aim of the guidelines is to maximize the value  of data while also setting the highest standards for  transparency and accountability when buying new AI and machine learning (ML) technology. Enhanced  procurement processes help promote the use of  AI and ML, giving the public sector more tools to  develop the economy and better serve the public.  The guidelines also inform suppliers about the  technical and ethical requirements of public-sector  bodies related to these technologies. They aim to  address specific business needs from the public and  private sector as well as to support public trust in the  government adoption of AI. Overall this should lead to  more efficient, responsible and sustainable outcomes  for the public and private sectors. During the pilot phase the procurement guidelines  were used by teams in the United Kingdom’s  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial  Strategy and the Food Standards Agency (see pilot  report for more detail) and facilitated workshops  in Bahrain, the UAE and the UK to test them  with government leaders (see key insights for the  workshops here).  It became clear that practical tools are needed  to tailor the guidelines to national contexts. The principle-based guidelines are useful to introduce  the key concepts, but more work is needed to  implement them in different jurisdictions. Therefore,  the team created a workbook that sits alongside  the AI procurement guidelines. It aims to provide  government officials and industry with greater clarity  on their purpose and enable them to embed the  guidelines into their procurement considerations.  The workbook aims to bring the guidelines to life  and provide practical guidance into all issues that  they raise.Co-creating Piloting and iterating 
8    AI Procurement in a Box: Project overviewThe AI Procurement in a Box guide will help  governments and public-sector organizations  to start rethinking their approach to the public  procurement of AI technologies. When developing  the guide, the team took a module-based  approach, at the heart of which the guidelines for  AI procurement sit. It is recommended that users  of the guide follow a step-by-step approach to  implementing the guidelines. Users of the AI Procurement in a Box:  –Governments that aim to accelerate AI adoption in  a safe, ethical and innovative manner  –Policy officials to accelerate attainment of their  policy goals  –Procurement officials and commercial teams to  develop AI-related requests for proposals and to  manage procurement processes  –Data practitioners and technology experts (e.g.  statisticians, data scientists, digital delivery  managers) to safeguard public benefit and identify  and manage potential risks  –AI-solutions providers to better understand the  core expectations for government AI projects and  to align their proposals with emerging standards  for public procurement  Any institution or government that aims to adopt  the guidelines in an incremental manner and to  drive strategic change by involving actors from  throughout the organization should follow these  stages described below: Learn  Facilitate internal and external multistakeholder  discussions into what AI is and review the  opportunities and risks of AI. Provide specific  examples of how AI is currently already used in   the public sector and gather best practices  and case studies for AI adoption from other  organizations worldwide.Review  Study the guidelines and consider the case  studies that can offer you insights into how other  organizations have procured AI technologies. Discover  Explore your current procurement practices and  compare them with the approach described in   the guidelines. Tailor  Match the guidelines with your current processes  and develop a new approach to procurement that  you test in different scenarios. Learn from the pilots  and further develop the tools in the AI Procurement  in a Box guide to ensure user-centric guidance for  your procurement teams. Implement  Share the insights from the pilots and complete the  adoption of new processes and standards. How these stages play out in practice will most  likely vary from organization to organization  and from country to country, as well as  depend on factors like maturity of AI adoption  and organizational structures. Nevertheless,  implementation methods that focus on  multistakeholder discussions and the development  of a coherent strategy are recommended. A  good starting point is to hold workshops and  round tables in collaboration with AI experts  and developers, including but not limited to,  consultancies, prominent IT service providers, startups, universities, research institutes and citizen  rights organizations.  Please get in touch with your insights once you’ve  trialled this guide: ai@weforum.orgHow do you use the AI Procurement in a Box ? 2.3
AI Procurement in a Box: Project overview    9Acknowledgements3 The World Economic Forum’s Unlocking Public  Sector Artificial Intelligence project, in collaboration  with the Government of the United Kingdom,  Deloitte Consulting and Splunk is a global,  multistakeholder and cross-disciplinary initiative  intended to help shape the public sector’s adoption  of AI, and emerging technologies in general, around  the world. The project has engaged leaders from private companies, governments, civil society  organizations and academia to understand  public-sector procurement of AI technology,  identify challenges and define principles to guide  responsible and ethical procurement. The opinions  expressed herein may not correspond with the  opinions of all members and organizations involved  in the project.  Lead authors: Sabine Gerdon  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Fellow,  World Economic Forum, Seconded from the  Office for Artificial Intelligence, Government of the  United Kingdom Eddan Katz  Project Lead, World Economic ForumEmilie LeGrand  McGill University Integrated Management   Student Fellow Gordon Morrison  Director of EMEA Government Affairs, Splunk Inc. Julián Torres Santeli  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Fellow,  World Economic Forum, Seconded from Deloitte  Canada’s AI practice  Rashid Alahmedi  Senior Specialist Technolgy and Solutions,  Dubai Electricity and Water Authority Greg Ainslie-Malik  Machine Learning Architect, Splunk Inc. Jesus Alvarez-Pinera  Head of Data, Food Standards Agency Shelby Austin  Managing Partner, Growth and Investments and  Omnia AI, Deloitte Yousef Al-Barkawie  Partner, Analytics and Cognitive Middle East Leader,  Deloitte Neil Barlow  Head of Vehicle Policy and Engineering,   Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency Kathy Baxter  Architect, Ethical AI Practice, Salesforce Lorena Cano  Digital Trade Fellow, World Economic Forum   from Inter-American Development Bank Ashley Casovan  Executive Director, AI GlobalMichael Costigan  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Fellow,  World Economic Forum from Salesforce Sue Daley  Associate Director, techUK Nihar Dalmia  Government and Public Sector AI leader for Deloitte  Canada, Deloitte Gourav Dhiman  Business Development Manager, XLPAT Cosmina Dorobantu  Deputy Director of Public Policy Programme,   The Alan Turing Institute Leslie Harper  Senior Sector Specialist, Inter-American  Development Bank James Hodge  Chief Technical Adviser, Splunk Inc. Hamad Karam  Senior Specialist Artificial Intelligence, Dubai  Electricity and Water Authority Andrew Kim  Head of AI Policy, Google CloudWe would like to thank our Unlocking Public-Sector AI  project community as well as the following contributors  for their insights:
10    AI Procurement in a Box: Project overviewSteven Knight  AI Lead, Food Standards Agency Benjamin Leich  Economic Adviser, Better Regulation Executive Katherine Mayes  Programme Manager, techUK Maha Mofeez  Chief Corporate Officer,   Bahrain Economic Development Board Valesca Molinari  Automotive and Autonomous Mobility Fellow,   World Economic Forum from Baker McKenzie Mariam Al Muhairi  Head, Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution  United Arab Emirates Khalid Al Mutawa  Director, Bahrain Information  and eGovernment Authority Brandie Nonnecke  Founding Director, CITRIS Policy Lab Arwa Al Qassim  AI Lead, Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution  United Arab Emirates Ana Rollan  Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Fellow,  World Economic Forum from BBVANada Al-Saeed  Data Policy Fellow, World Economic Forum from  Bahrain Economic Development Board Komal Sharma Talwar  Director, XLPAT and TT Consultants Leonard Stein  Senior Strategic Adviser, Splunk Inc. Jitin Talwar  Founder, XLPAT and TT Consultants Sandeep Singh Kohli  Co-founder, XLPAT Ahmad Al Tawallbeh  Specialist Artificial Intelligence, Dubai Electricity   and Water Authority Abbey Thornhill  Assistant Economist, Better Regulation Executive Adrian Weller  Programme Director for AI, The Alan Turing Institute Mark Woods  Director, Technology and Innovation, Splunk Inc. Tim Woodbury  Director of State and Local Government Affairs,  Splunk Inc. Sue Bateman  Deputy Director for Policy and Innovation,  Government Digital Service Oliver Buckley  Executive Director, Centre for Data Ethics and  InnovationStephen Hennigan  Deputy Head of Office for Artificial Intelligence,  United Kingdom Government Sana Khareghani  Head of Office for Artificial Intelligence, United  Kingdom GovernmentThank you also to the teams in the UK from the Defence  Science and Technology Laboratory, the Department  for Transport, the Home Office Accelerated Capability  Environment and local governments that supported the user  testing and piloting. The steering and working group from  the Department of Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, the  Government Digital Service, the Cabinet Office, the Crown  Commercial Service and the Centre for Data Ethics and  Innovation has been instrumental to progressing this work,  in particular: Thank you to everyone who contributed through interviews, workshops and discussions in the last  18 months in Dalian, Dubai, London, Manama, San Francisco, Tianjin, Toronto and Washington DC.

World Economic Forum 91–93 route de la Capite CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva Switzerland   Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212 Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744 contact@weforum.org www.weforum.orgThe World Economic Forum,  committed to improving   the state of the world, is the  International Organization for  Public-Private Cooperation.   The Forum engages the  foremost political, business   and other leaders of society   to shape global, regional  and industry agendas.
