


Solutions.AI: Scalable AI to Change Your Business | Accenture










































































Skip to main content
Skip to footer




























Insights


Services


















Cloud
			  
		  


Cybersecurity
			  
		  


Data and Artificial Intelligence
			  
		  


Digital Engineering and Manufacturing
			  
		  


Emerging Technology
			  
		  


Enterprise Platforms
			  
		  


Finance and Risk Management
			  
		  


Learning
			  
		  


Marketing and Experience
			  
		  


Metaverse
			  
		  


Private Equity
			  
		  


Sales and Commerce
			  
		  


Strategic Managed Services
			  
		  


Strategy
			  
		  


Supply Chain
			  
		  


Sustainability
			  
		  


Talent and Organization
			  
		  


Technology Transformation
			  
		  




















Industries


















Aerospace and Defense
			  
		  


Automotive
			  
		  


 Banking
			  
		  


 Capital Markets
			  
		  


Chemicals
			  
		  


 Communications and Media
			  
		  


 Consumer Goods and Services
			  
		  


 Energy
			  
		  


Health
			  
		  


 High Tech
			  
		  


 Industrial
			  
		  


 Insurance
			  
		  


Life Sciences
			  
		  


Natural Resources
			  
		  


 Public Service
			  
		  


 Retail
			  
		  


Software and Platforms
			  
		  


 Travel
			  
		  


Utilities
			  
		  




















Careers


















Careers Home
			  
		  


Search Jobs
			  
		  








Join Us
Join Us

Careers


Executive Leaders
			  
		  


Experienced Professionals
			  
		  


Students
			  
		  


Training & Development
			  
		  


Work Environment
			  
		  


Advanced Technology Centre
			  
		  


Ex-Military Professionals
			  
		  








Explore Jobs
Explore Jobs

Careers


Search Jobs by Areas of Expertise
			  
		  


Consulting Jobs
			  
		  


Corporate Jobs
			  
		  


Digital Jobs
			  
		  


Operations Jobs
			  
		  


Strategy Jobs
			  
		  


Technology Jobs
			  
		  


Cybersecurity Jobs
			  
		  




















About Accenture















WHO WE ARE
WHO WE ARE

About Accenture


About Accenture
			  
		  


Leadership
			  
		  


How We Work with Clients
			  
		  


Case Studies
			  
		  


Newsroom
			  
		  


Investor Relations
			  
		  


Inclusion & Diversity
			  
		  








How We're Organized
How We're Organized

About Accenture


Strategy and Consulting
			  
		  


Song
			  
		  


Technology
			  
		  


Operations
			  
		  


Industry X
			  
		  

























Contact Us


Careers


Locations






























United Kingdom





Default (English)
All COUNTRIES & LANGUAGES

Argentina (Spanish)


Australia (English)


Austria (German) 


Belgium (English)


Brazil (Portuguese)


Bulgaria (English)


Canada (English)


Canada (French) 


Chile (Spanish)


China/Hong Kong SAR (English)


China/Mainland (Chinese)


China/Mainland (English)


Colombia (Spanish)


Costa Rica (English)


Czech Republic (English)


Denmark (English)


Finland (English)


France (French)


Germany (German)


Greece (English)


Hungary (English)


India (English)


Indonesia (English)


Ireland  (English)


Israel (English)


Italy (Italian)


Japan (Japanese)


Latvia (English)


Luxembourg (English)


Malaysia (English)


Mauritius (English)


Mexico (Spanish)


Morocco (English)


Netherlands (English)


New Zealand (English)


Norway (English)


Philippines (English)


Poland (English)


Poland (Polish)


Portugal (Portuguese)


Romania (English)


Saudi Arabia (English)


Singapore (English)


Slovakia (English)


South Africa (English)


Spain (Spanish)


Sweden (English)


Switzerland (English)


Thailand (English)


UAE (English)


United Kingdom (English)


USA (English)




























Artificial Intelligence










AI solutions to change your business






Scalable artificial intelligence solutions that deliver game-changing results, fast.


































         What We Deliver 
      
        
      
        
      
        
      
        
      





What We Deliver




By The Numbers




Case Studies




Our AI Solutions




Our Leaders





















		
		
			RESPONSIBLE BY DESIGN
		
		
From AI compliance to competitive advantage

LEARN MORE
















Putting AI to work across your business


















Think about how you want to change your business. Do you want to reduce operating costs to improve margin? Scale personalized experiences to delight your customers? Create completely new revenue streams by leveraging AI-powered insights? While we recognize that not everyone shares the same immediate business priorities, speed is a universal KPI that we're prepared to deliver. Artificial intelligence is what makes it possible.
Solutions.AI is Accenture's collection of AI solutions that are designed to unlock new efficiencies and growth, enable new ways of working, and facilitate game-changing innovation—3x faster than the typical product lifecycle. Built and delivered on the foundation of Accenture's unparalleled AI expertise, data services, intellectual property and ecosystem partners, our scalable, modular solutions minimize time to market and maximize business impact.
Even better, while every solution is already fine-tuned for a specific industry and function, each can be quickly tailored to solve unique client challenges. So, no matter whom we're partnering with across the organization or what we're working to accomplish, Solutions.AI can accelerate the pace and potential of change.















View Transcript
















Solutions.AI for Talent & Skilling Explained


















Solutions.AI for Processing Explained


















Solutions.AI for Marketing Explained


















Solutions.AI for Customer Engagement Explained


















Solutions.AI for Pricing Explained


















Solutions.AI for B2B Growth Explained


































What we deliver




We build and deploy powerful AI solutions that change the way our clients work.


























		
        Speed to value
    
We quickly configure and deploy solutions using pre-built, pre-integrated AI and machine learning (ML) models and real-time, industry-specific data sets. We scale swiftly and confidently, knowing Responsible AI must be baked in from the start.















		
        Rapid innovation
    

We create and update every solution with unique Accenture IP to supercharge co-innovation with clients. And we use AIP+ to experiment and quickly prove value before we scale.















		
        Client-first flexibility
    
Our solutions are AI-powered and built to deliver client value, period. That's why they're built to work with virtually any technology partner and used through a variety of consumption models and hosting environments, based on the specific client need.



































		
		
			NEW GLOBAL RESEARCH
		
		

		
        The art of AI maturity
    
Discover how organizations master AI to achieve high performance for customers, shareholders and employees.


READ THE REPORT






















		
		
			THE AUTOMATION ADVANTAGE
		
		
A Comprehensive Guide to Intelligent Automation

READ MORE
















By the numbers

















2-3x


Speed to value versus the typical product lifecycle





500+


Scaled AI deployments





25+


Industry-specific, scalable solutions…and counting



























Case studies
























Solutions.AI is at work across our client engagements. Take a closer look at the business benefits of our AI solutions.












































			Artificial Intelligence
		


Data-driven pricing for excellent customer service

Banca Sella is meeting customer needs with an AI-powered pricing tool that optimizes credit product prices based on customer and market changes.


READ MORE


















			Artificial Intelligence
		


Optimal planning with AI

How a leading US retailer used AI to improve marketing spend.

READ MORE


















			Artificial Intelligence
		


Vodafone

Using AI to anticipate customer needs and deliver better service

READ MORE


















			Public Service
		


Tennessee

Activating a human + machine workforce to help citizens with their COVID-19 related queries

READ MORE


















			Data & Analytics
		


Manzoni

Reinforcing brand leadership with the help of data and artificial intelligence

READ MORE



































"We’re building intelligent software products that will make AI relevant for every customer in every industry."




— ANDY HICKL, Solutions.AI Global Lead








SHARE




























































Our AI solutions






























Our AI-powered solutions supply insights from a rich and diverse data pipeline; support fast and effective decision making with sophisticated artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms, and integrate seamlessly into our clients' systems and processes to maximize business adoption.









































		
        Customer Engagement
    
Grow revenue, reduce opex and increase customer lifetime value through exceptional, personalized customer service experiences.

LEARN MORE















		
        Marketing
    
Facilitate incredible customer experiences that boost customer lifetime value and improve marketing efficiencies.

LEARN MORE















		
        Pricing
    
Unlock margin by optimizing price, pack, and promotion with precision.

LEARN MORE















		
        B2B Growth
    
Improve sales performance by targeting, converting, and growing the highest-quality leads.

LEARN MORE















		
        Talent
    
Provide corporate leaders with rich workforce insights to help inform talent decisions and fuel productivity and efficiency.

LEARN MORE















		
        Processing
    
Complement the workforce to transform critical business processes for 3x to 10x productivity gains.

LEARN MORE




























Spotlight on: AIP+


















AIP+ is Accenture’s managed-service architecture with pre-integrated software assets. By building all our AI solutions on AIP+, we offer clients quick access to cutting edge AI capabilities and a broad range of platform services, including data governance, ML Ops and 24/7 monitoring and support.
 
LEARN MORE










































What we think























View Transcript
















Industrialize AI with Artificial Intelligence


















The Professionalization of AI

















Technology Vision 2024

Technology is becoming more human: intuitive, with human-like intelligence, and easy to integrate across our lives.


read more








From AI compliance to competitive advantage

Explore organizations' attitudes towards AI regulation and their readiness to embrace it.


read more








Supply chain analytics and AI

Driving relevance, resilience and responsibility.


read more








A new era of generative AI for everyone

The technology underpinning ChatGPT will transform work and reinvent business.


Read more































Our leaders

























Ajay Vasal
Managing Director — Applied Intelligence, Centre for Data & Insights Global Lead

LinkedIn














Lisa Wilson
Managing Director — Applied Intelligence, AIP+ Global Lead

LinkedIn




























Join us


















The next AI revolution will be built by people like you. Pursue your passion and change the future of business using all things AI, analytics and automation.



Explore AI careers










































Related capabilities




















Artificial Intelligence





Harness the power of data and artificial intelligence to accelerate change for your business.








Responsible AI





Take an approach that supports agile innovation and ensures governance of your AI systems.








Data-led Transformation





Recognize the value of data to drive sustainable growth.



























Frequently asked questions






















What are Artificial Intelligence (AI) solutions?









Artificial intelligence (AI) solutions are pre-built and/or customizable solutions designed to address specific use cases and solve unique business challenges. These solutions use robust data sets, advanced AI/ML models and cutting-edge intelligent technologies to enable machines to sense, comprehend, act, and learn with human-like levels of intelligence.











What types of challenges can AI solutions address?














What industries are using AI solutions?









AI is transforming nearly all industries, including automotive, banking, retail, consumer goods, health, life sciences, utilities, insurance, high tech, public service, resources, software and platforms, communications and media and more. AI solutions are often pre-configured to solve for industry-specific challenges, like handling surges in insurance claims or helping retailers improve their marketing spend. Regardless of your industry, AI-powered solutions can help your organization become more efficient, profitable and competitive.











Will AI-powered solutions replace humans and eliminate jobs?









While AI has the potential to replace some jobs (especially those that involve repetitive or standardized tasks), we believe AI will primarily be used to augment human intelligence and complement existing roles. It will never fully replace humans because machines will never be as creative, empathetic, or as culturally sensitive. Human oversight and critical thinking are key when working with data and AI solutions to ensure responsible decisions are being made every step of the way. In this sense, if it’s applied thoughtfully, AI can create new jobs and transform current ones, so that humans can take on more strategic, productive, and fulfilling work. Reskilling affected workers should always be considered in large scale transformational AI projects.




















































































Please enable Advertising and Social Media Cookies to be able to see this content.
Click here to update your cookie settings.









Visit our Subscription and Preference Center



Subscribe

















	        			About Us
	        		



	        			Contact Us
	        		



	        			Careers
	        		



	        			Locations
	        		




























	        			Privacy Statement
	        		



	        			Terms & Conditions
	        		



	        			Cookie Policy/Settings
	        		



	        			Accessibility Statement
	        		



	        			Sitemap
	        		



	        			 Modern Slavery Act Statement
	        		



	        			 Accenture Tax Strategy
	        		



				    © 2024 Accenture. All Rights Reserved.
				    



















