AI ROADMAPUK AI COUNCIL The AI Council is an independent expert committee. It provides advice to the UK Government, as well as high-level leadership of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) ecosystem. This independent report draws on the expertise of its members and those in its wider  ecosystem to summarise four pillars on which to build the UK's future in AI. It invites action  across government to keep the UK at the forefront of safe and responsible AI.
Executive summary 2 16 recommendations to help the government develop a UK National AI Strategy 4 Introduction 6 1. Research, Development and Innovation 10 The Alan Turing Institute: local presences and global reach 11 Challenge-led innovation 12 AI to transform research, development and innovation 14 2. Skills and Diversity 16 What everyone needs to know 16 Further, Higher and Graduate Education 17 Supporting every teacher 18 Lifelong learning and an online academy for AI 18 3. Data, Infrastructure and Public Trust 20 Trustworthy and accessible data 20 Public trust and good governance 22 Digital Twins and Living Labs 24 A globally leading role 25 4. National, Cross-sector Adoption 28 Business as smart adopters 28 Supporting high growth AI startups 29 Enabling public sector adoption 30 Health and social care 31 Climate change 32 Defence and security 33 Acknowledgements 36UK AI COUNCIL |AIROADMAP Version 1(JA-B_DE)
2AI ROADMAP 3 AsArtificialIntelligence(AI)becomes embeddedinpeople’slives,theUK findsitselfatapivotalmoment. Estimates show that AI could deliver a  10% increase in UK GDP in 2030.1If  approached correctly, this would offer  huge benefits to the economy, to  recovery and resilience, the environment  and for people from all walks of life  across all parts of the UK. This summary  report by the AI Council sets out longterm ambitions and suggests near-term  directions for all government  departments, with the aim of cementing  the UK as one of the very best places in  the world to live with, work with and  develop AI.  The UK starts from a place of strength in  research, enterprise and regulation, and  with its history of recent support for AI it  stands among the best in the world. The  UK government’s ambition should push for scale and reliability in areas of unique  advantage. To be influential in attracting  talent, shaping global markets and global  governance we call on the government to  build a UK National AI strategy that scales  up its investment for a decade and  beyond.  This report has two underlying messages.  The first is that we need to “double down”  on recent investment the UK has made in  AI. The second message is that we must  look to the horizon and be adaptable to  disruption. Support for AI needs to reflect  the rapid pace and evolution of the  science & technology and its applications.  This means staying at the forefront of the  development of AI and integrating  approaches to ethics, security and social  impacts and planning for the next 10-50  years. The UK will only feel the full  benefits of AI if all parts of society have  full confidence in the science and the  technologies, and in the governance and regulation that enable them. That  confidence will depend on the existence  of systems that ensure full accountability,  clear ethics and transparency. Developing  the best science and the most robust  applications requires commitment to an  ambitious programme of investment in  talent; one that promotes cutting edge  skills and does so in ways that makes AI  accessible in ways that are more diverse  and inclusive. Given the breadth and significance of  potential AI applications, this Roadmap is  concerned with overcoming the  challenges of enabling change. It sets out  suggested directions across four pillars:  Research, Development & Innovation;  Skills and Diversity, and Data,  Infrastructure and Public Trust - and  then, in the final section, addresses some  specific measures to support adoption  and the key areas of health, climate and  defence.This Roadmap and its recommendations  reflects the views of the Council as well as  100+ additional experts. We recognise it  will not be possible to achieve all at once,  and this is why a National AI Strategy is  needed to prioritise and set a time frame  that will position the UK for success. In  order to support the government, we are  ready to convene workshops with the  wider ecosystem in order to capture  more detail and work together to ensure  that a future National AI Strategy enables  the whole of the UK to flourish.Executive summary 1The economic impact of artificial intelligence on the UK economy , PwC (June 2017)““ A National AI Strategy is needed to  prioritise and set a time frame that will  position the UK for successThe UK will only feel the full benefits of AI if all  parts of society have full confidence in the science  and the technologies, and in the governance and  regulation that enable them
4 AI ROADMAP 5 Research, Development and Innovation 1. Scaleupandmakesustainablepublic sectorinvestmentinAI;ensure consistentaccesstotoptalentfrom aroundtheworld;andfindnewways tobringresearchers,disciplinesand sectorstogether. Build on the  commitments in the government’s R&D  Roadmap2and suggestions in the soon  to be published UKRI AI review3. 2. CementTheAlanTuringInstituteasa trulynationalinstitute,withasetof regionalinvestmentsthatdrawon strengthsfromacrosstheUK. Provide assured long term public  sector funding that will give the Turing  and others the confidence to plan and  invest in strategic leadership for the UK  in AI research, development and  innovation. 3. Ensuremoonshots,asdescribedin theR&DRoadmapaschallenge-led, high-risk,scalableprogrammes,are bothadvancingandleveragingAI. These could tackle fundamental  challenges such as creating  “explainable AI”, or important goals in  any area where AI can contribute  strongly, such as the UK Digital Twin  program or developing smart materials  for energy storage in the move towards  Net Zero carbon emissions.Skills and Diversity Data, Infrastructure and Public TrustNational, Cross-sector  Adoption  4. Scaleupandcommittoanongoing10 yearprogrammeofhighlevelAIskillbuilding. This would include research  fellowships, AI-relevant PhDs across  disciplines, industry-led Masters and level  7 apprenticeships. 5. Makediversityandinclusionapriority. We suggest benchmarking and  forensically tracking levels of diversity to  make data-led decisions about where to  invest and ensure that underrepresented  groups are given equal opportunity and  included in all programs. 6. CommittoachievingAIanddataliteracy foreveryone. The public needs to  understand the risks and rewards of AI so  they can be confident and informed  users. An online academy for  understanding AI, with trusted materials  and initiatives would support teachers,  school students and lifelong learning.7. Consolidateandacceleratethe infrastructureneededtoincrease accesstodataforAI. Invest in the  relevant organisations, link general  principles to specific applications, and  pursue initiatives for pump priming  innovation and enabling safe data  sharing for valuable uses. 8. Leadthedevelopmentofdata governanceoptionsanditsuses. The UK should lead in developing  appropriate standards to frame the  future governance of data. 9. Ensurepublictrustthroughpublic scrutiny. The UK must lead in finding  ways to enable public scrutiny of, and  input to, automated decision-making  and help ensure that the public can  trust AI. 10.ThoughtfullypositiontheUKwith respecttoothermajorAInations. Building on its strengths, the UK has a  crucial opportunity to become a global  lead in good governance, standards  and frameworks for AI and enhance  bilateral cooperation with key actors.11.IncreasebuyerconfidenceandAI capabilityacrossallsectorsandall sizesofcompany. Support investment  for local initiatives to enable safe valuecreating innovation and improve the  data maturity needed for AI  innovation. 12.SupporttheUK’sAIstartupvendor community. Enable greater access to  data, infrastructure, skills, compute,  specialist knowledge and funds. 13.Enablerobustpublicsector investmentsinAI, building capability  in the use of data, analytics and AI to  ensure intelligent procurement of AI as  part of projects for public benefit. 14.UseAItomeetthechallengesofNet Zerocarbonemissions. Work on  access to data, governance, to develop  cleaner systems, products and  services. 15.UseAItohelpkeepthecountrysafe andsecure. Work with government  departments/agencies and defence  and security companies to ensure AI is  available to assess and respond to  modern defence and security threats  and opportunities. 16.BuildontheworkofNHSXandothers toleadthewayinusingAItoimprove outcomesandcreatevaluein healthcare. The UK’s comparative  advantage will depend on smart  strategies for data sharing, new  partnership models with SMEs and  skill-building.16recommendationstohelpthe governmentdevelopaUKNationalAIStrategy 2UK Research and Development Roadmap , UK Government (July 2020) 3[To be published early 2021]
6AI ROADMAP 7 ArtificialIntelligence(AI)isbreaking intothemainstreamofsocietiesand theglobaleconomy. The history of AI is characterised by  cycles of boom and bust, with waves of  excessive hype followed by “AI winters”.  This time things are different: advances in  machine learning and neural networks  have led to great advances in fields such  as computer vision and speech  recognition, and natural language  processing, with numerous applications  used by hundreds of millions of people  on a daily basis. Safely harnessed AI is  revolutionising certain types of tasks,  disrupting business models, and  complementing and enhancing human  capabilities in wholly new ways. These  tremendous advances have come from  increasing the sizes of training data sets,  and the associated networks and  compute power, by factors of a million or  more, along with modifications to the underlying algorithms, many of which  have been with us in some form for a  long time. This accounts for tens of  billions of dollars in global annual value  creation, and looks set to increase  markedly over the coming decade.4 The UK has fundamental strengths in AI  which reach back to the intellectual  origins of the science, with figures like  Alan Turing, Joan Clarke, Donald Michie  and many others, to its ability to debate  and enact sound governance of new  technologies. Successive governments,  businesses and civil groups have worked  hard to make increasing amounts of data  and information more available in ways  that combine safety and usefulness.  In recent years, the UK has been the site  of an array of initiatives aimed at  developing and deploying AI across the  economy for society. Building on these  with focus and structure will ensure AI is an essential part of tackling the major  challenges of economic recovery  following the COVID-19 pandemic, of  levelling up the UK economy through the  creation of jobs and prosperity beyond  London and the South East, of ensuring  new forms of health and social care, of  reaching net zero carbon emissions, and  of ensuring resilience to future economic,  health, or environmental shocks. It will  also create entirely new opportunities for  human flourishing.  These fundamental strengths and recent  initiatives have helped the UK to be  amongst the global leaders in many areas  of AI, from accelerating drug discovery5to  helping businesses make decisions that  accurately factor in climate volatility.6 However, the next few months and years  will be crucial in determining where the  UK places its desired level of ambition in  AI, as massive investments by  governments and businesses around the  world are already priming themselves to  influence the global conversation. The  scale of effort elsewhere must not be  underestimated: Germany has  committed €3.1 billion towards a national  AI strategy up to 20257, and France has  pledged €1.5 billion up to 2022, with  almost half earmarked for research.8 While the UK has played a leading role in  the development of AI, the US has  recently announced $1 billion over the coming five years to open 12 new  institutes that will keep the country at the  forefront of research in AI and quantum  computing9, and like-minded countries  such as Canada and Germany are leading  on commercialisation as measured by  patents.10 The Council calls for a UK National AI  Strategy that creates an even stronger  general base of support for AI. Scotland  has already embarked on an AI Strategy  and the UK strategy should be created in  consultation with the devolved  administrations and the wider  ecosystem.  The UK cannot, and need not try to,  compete equally in all economic sectors  so it must shape its strategy carefully to  ensure it prioritises and is able to act  selectively to lead and to capture markets  around the world. In doing this it will  need to consider its options for  collaboration and competition within the  international scientific and economic  landscapes.Introduction 4 Some estimates show that leading nations could gain an extra 20-25% in economic growth and productivity gains through AI over the next decade. Modelling the impact of AI on the global economy , McKinsey (September 2018) 5Biotech harness AI in battle against Covid-19 , Financial Times (May 2020) 6UK tech for a sustainable future , Tech Nation (2020) 7Germany AI Strategy Report , European Commission (March 2020) 8France AI Strategy Report , European Commission (February 2020) 9The Trump Administration Is Investing $1 Billion in Research Institutes to Advance Industries of the Future , The White House (August 2020) 10 WIPO Technology Trends 2019: Artificial Intelligence , World Intellectual Property Organisation (January 2019) 11 Developing an AI Strategy for Scotland , Scotland’s AI Strategy (2019)
8AI ROADMAP 9 The Council has considered how to  diffuse the development of AI across  sections of society that would help to  both improve the lives of its citizens and  bring economic benefits in the form of  recovery and resilience. This has resulted  in four pillars:  • support for research, development  and innovation; • literacy in AI across the population  with enhanced AI-related skills at all  levels of educational and lifelong  attainment; • sound physical, digital and virtual  infrastructure, including robust and  flexible regulation as a form of social  infrastructure, resulting in good  governance that boosts public trust; • and pragmatic approaches to  national, cross-sector adoption that  meaningfully advances public and  private sector applications. This Roadmap sets out the requirements  in each of these areas in more detail and  builds on the 2017 Hall-PesentiAIReview . Its premise is that, in most areas, what  the UK needs to do is to “double down”  on the best of the investments it has  already made, and to accelerate what’s  proved to be ‘working building’ capability  across organisations and sectors. Doing  this is not easy, and least of all in the face  of jobs at risk that could be made more  vulnerable by the twin pressures of the  COVID-19 pandemic and automation.12Fundamentally, it requires commitments  of a size, and for sustained timescales,  that are often only possible at times of  disruption such as the one the world is  going through now with its response and  recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. It  therefore requires a degree of collective  vision and of boldness, combining this  leadership with the confidence to create  spaces for entrepreneurism in all parts of  society and the economy in order to find  new ways to use AI to benefit everyone. In a small number of important areas this  Roadmap points in new directions. As AI  becomes more integrated into daily life,  developing trustworthy technology is vital  and businesses will require a novel  approach to good governance and  consideration of the ethical and societal  implications of AI as part of the design  process, with greater multi-disciplinary  and cross-disciplinary approaches  throughout. The UK needs to develop a  world-class enabling environment with  strong but flexible legislation and wellresourced, capable regulators able to  provide responsive guidance and timely  oversight. This Roadmap is not a draft strategy, and  nor is it an instruction manual. This is a  set of recommendations and we  recognise it will not be possible to  achieve all at once. This is why a National  AI Strategy is needed to prioritise and set  a time frame. We are ready to convene  workshops across all of the areas laid out  in this Roadmap, and more, to capture  the full spectrum of thought across the UK in a way that would lend itself to the  development of a UK National AI Strategy.  We have set out a clear direction that we  believe will accelerate the UK to a positive  technological future and start the  necessary conversations needed to  create a strategy that will enable the  whole of the UK to flourish. 12Who is at risk? , The Royal Society for Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (October 2020) finds that, broadly speaking, industries with the highest level of furlough take-up are more  likely to be at risk of automation.
10AI ROADMAP 11 AI’sfullpotentialwillonlyberealised intheUKifthegovernmentcontinues tocreatetheconditionsforleading edgeresearch,developmentand innovationinAIforthepublicand privatesectors,andifitcreatesthe conditionsforAItoworkinandwith multipledisciplinesandareasof societyandtheeconomy. In common with some other parts of this  Roadmap, what can seem like a  restatement of general principles that  could be taken for granted is, in fact, a  challenging requirement for sustained  systemic change. The government’s R&D Roadmap13makes  an excellent start in outlining some of the  areas of systemic change that will  particularly benefit AI. One of the most  important commitments is to make the  UK a place that is open and inviting to  top talent. Demand for AI talent is at an all-time high, and there is more to do to  attract and retain the very best to the  UK’s shores. Skills training, both at a  research and workforce level, is vital to  translate research, development and  innovation, and suggestions are detailed  in the forthcoming section. The government R&D Roadmap includes  valuable commitments to strengthening  the interactions between discovery and  applied research, innovation,  commercialisation and deployment. This  is vital: funding either excellent basic or  applied research in isolation risks the  outputs and the people being easily  transferred to other countries, so any  competitive advantage can be easily and  quickly lost, especially to other countries  that have more resources than the UK.  The R&D Roadmap also signifies support  for entrepreneurs; creating a more placebased approach to research,  development and innovation; and the aspiration to be more imaginative in ways  of ensuring that research and innovation  is directly responsive to the needs and  aspirations of society. This last point  echoes strongly the views of the AI  Council’s ecosystem.  In addition to building on these broad  directions, there are three areas which  are more specific to AI and on which the  government needs to take significant  action.  TheAlanTuringInstitute:local presencesandglobalreach The first is to build on the existing success  of The Alan Turing Institute as a national  champion for AI research, development  and innovation in the UK. In a relatively  short period of time the Turing has  developed to play a pivotal role in  promoting AI research across sectors and  in attracting talent by leveraging its  growing network. Over the past year, the  Turing has attracted 77 new Turing  Fellows, bringing the total to 369, and 21  new research associates alongside 116  events across their research portfolio, and  a student enrichment scheme intake  representing 36% female and 32% from  BAME backgrounds.14It has also reached  out to crowdsource best practice for data  science and AI research, was pivotal in  creating a new discipline in data-centric  engineering, and has worked across  government to provide policy advice and  operational support. Concentrating on these beginnings, an  enhanced and reshaped Turing will be a  crucial part of the necessary research,  development and innovation  infrastructure but, to play that role fully,  some changes are needed. The UK’s  research system as a whole cannot reach  its full potential while the original  membership model has the effect of  inadvertently excluding excellent research  teams across the four nations. The UK  needs the Turing to have a full national  reach so that it can play its part in  levelling up and in supporting talent and  great ideas wherever they start. To do  this, it will need to be able to bring  together researchers, businesses, civil  groups and the public sector to make  great ideas work at all geographic levels  and at a sector-wide scale.  A new Turing model might, for example,  extend both its virtual and physical  presences to energise more regional and  local activity. There are several ways to  achieve such aims, building on the  Turing’s convening role in the UK  landscape to join up and build on existing  teams and infrastructure. This could be  delivered through Turing acting as a  headquarters and convenor of a  nationally network of centres-ofexcellence or hubs, which may be physical  or virtual, which would not only advance  AI research but also development,  innovation and deployment into the  regions. Across these centres, skills  training will be at both the research level  and, most importantly, in apprenticeships,  upskilling and reskilling regional 1.Research, Development andInnovation 13UK Research and Development Roadmap , UK Government (July 2020) 14Annual Report 2019-20 , The Alan Turing Institute (2020) 
12AI ROADMAP RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION 13 workforces to exploit the opportunities of  AI across sectors of the UK economy.  Models for such centres might be based  on, for example, UK’s National Cyber  Security Centre, or focus on regions to  support AI research, development and  innovation capability to support the local  economy.  Well-funded institutes are becoming  highly valued components of national AI  strategies, and as a national institute of  global standing, the Turing also needs the  assured long term public sector funding  that will give it and others the confidence  to plan and invest for the medium term  and strategic leadership for the UK, with  the needs of academia, businesses, civil  groups and the public sector reflected in  its strategic direction. A well-funded UK  institute would not only signal the UK’s  commitment to remaining a globally  leading player over the coming decades,  it could also promote the UK’s interests  through collaborations with international  partners and enable it to play a  significant role in building the  international infrastructure discussed as  part of the third pillar in this Roadmap. Sustainable funding would enable the  Turing to provide visible national  leadership on matters of AI security and  ethics, and use this leadership role and  connectivity across the landscape to  ensure the UK remains at the forefront of  next-generation AI developments, such  as those involving machine learning from  small data sets, and machine learning as  part of wholly new types of neural interface technologies.15This added  focus on how to leap-frog current  machine learning-based AI technologies  would enable the UK, through the Turing  and its network-trusted and neutral  status, to also become the place for  Explainable AI, bringing us closer to safe,  responsible and trustworthy AI. Challenge-ledinnovation The significant promise of AI and its high  risk, high reward, aspirational nature  lends itself to goal-directed “moonshot”  programmes in the style often associated  with ARPA-esque models.16a Properly  designed and delivered moonshot  programmes play to AI’s strengths by  requiring people to work across  boundaries and existing organisational  structures, and to build new  relationships, networks and common  languages in order to develop entirely  new solutions to big challenges. In  addition to this, there is a need for the  UK to consider further the question of  how AI interacts with people, and what it  means to create effective human-AI  partnerships. One such moonshot, directly relevant to  AI, might involve a major challenge aimed  at developing and establishing  appropriate methods for safe, ethical,  explainable and reproducible AI which  will accelerate its use across many  sectors. Another would be the  development of an innovation ecosystem  enabled by the UK Digital Twin  programme, as discussed later in this Roadmap, within which AI would use  these virtual worlds to explore real world  optimisations that are beyond human  scale.  AI should also be built into moonshots in  other sectors where it could play a major  part, for example to radically accelerate  materials science to develop new  materials that can better store energy  from renewable sources, or in solving for  real-time control of the increasingly  complex electricity distribution network as  the country moves towards net zero  emissions.  Across all the potential types of challengebased funding, programmes need to be  selected and designed to draw in and  accelerate AI’s integration across  disciplines and sectors. One suggestion  would be to select broad sectors that are  more mature, and thus ripe for AI  adoption than others, and use the  mission-based approach to focus minds.  This would bring together basic and  applied research and multiple disciplines  across research horizons and  opportunities for systems development,  helping to mature AI as a discipline.  The specific vehicle for delivering  moonshots is a ripe topic for discussion,  but a forward-looking framework for  research, development and innovation  consisting of a series of labs, which  conceive of and build fully engineered  prototypes and platforms, could offer a  flexible model of experimentation. These  labs could generate vision-based sequences of projects around moonshot  challenges and could serve those with an  interest in working between industry,  academia and the public sector. By providing significant signals about  potential future developments,  moonshots create space for informed  public and business engagement with the  emerging science and applications. Under  these circumstances the science and  technology is not simply communicated  to; it is inspired by, and carried out with,  individuals, communities and businesses.  Such space enables all those involved to  explore how AI interacts with people and  what it means to create human-AI  partnerships. In turn, the projects will  help define responsible and ethical  practices to meet society’s needs and  aspirations for a technology that behaves  as people and businesses hope and  expect: safely, securely and reliably. 15iHuman perspective: Neural interfaces , The Royal Society (September 2019) 16aThe US’ Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) is a model designed to concentrate funding around pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies, often for national  security purposes. DARPA (for Defense) is the most well-known ARPA agency in the US and is credited with developing a number of disruptive technologies such as stealth  technology, the foundations of the Internet, and miniature GPS receivers.
14AI ROADMAP RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION 15 AItotransformresearch, developmentandinnovation Capitalising on the promise of AI will  continue to require investment in basic  research into the fundamentals of AI  itself. Researchers, increasingly working  across disciplines, will need to address  some of the fundamental challenges that  remain, such as establishing a common  language through which to develop data  science projects or interoperability  between datasets, which can drive smart  collaboration. AI systems often rely on a  narrow disciplinary base, and this needs  to be broadened to cover an array of  domains in an intelligent way. AI  technologies need to get better at  extending into areas where they do not  have structured data, and to navigate  effectively through that. At the same time AI is transforming the  nature of research itself, with examples in  particle physics and bioinformatics.16bFor  the UK to retain its status as a global  leader in research, it needs to stay well  abreast of the potentially disruptive  effects of AI and other forms of data  science which are beginning to be  incorporated into all forms of knowledge  creation, including the social sciences  and the humanities. Given the availability  of massive data sets and computer  power, such disruptions could range  from game-changing increases in  efficiency in routine tasks such as  searching texts or large observational  data sets, to entirely new forms of  enquiry brought about by AI’s ability to spot new patterns and prompt new  questions and insights, often across  existing disciplinary boundaries. 16bAlphaFold: a solution to a 50-year-old grand challenge in biology , DeepMind (November 2020)
16AI ROADMAP 17 TheCouncil’svisionisforeveryoneto beabletoliveconfidentlywithAI,and forthosewhogoontoworkwithit andtobuildittodosowiththevery bestfoundation. For the most technically talented  individuals we need to guarantee a bestin-class postgraduate offering to access  globally attractive pathways that will  contribute to the country’s renowned  research base. Success will depend on increasing the  diversity of people working on and with AI  until those AI communities reflect the  society they inhabit. It’s important to  focus on diversity; not as an afterthought,  but because doing so will generate  crucial research questions and lead to  the widest and most innovative range of  future technologies which will serve the  needs of the people. There are wonderful  examples of emergent leadership, creativity, and energy in promoting  diversity but it is not enough. We suggest  benchmarking and forensically tracking  levels of diversity and inclusion in AI as  the NCSC17has recently done for cyber  security, to make data-led decisions  about where to invest and ensure that  underrepresented groups are included in  funding programs. Government must do  more to encourage the best of the  existing initiatives where diversity is  enabled, and to expand with their own  schemes and campaigns, if the needle is  to be sufficiently moved. Whateveryoneneedstoknow The UK needs to set itself challenging but  realistic goals to ensure that every child  leaves school with a basic sense of how  AI works. This is not just about  understanding the basics of coding or  quantitative reasoning, or to describe the  mathematical concepts; nor is it simply about ethics. It is about knowing enough  to be a conscious and confident user of  AI-related products; to know what  questions to ask, what risks to look out  for, what ethical and societal implications  might arise, and what kinds of  opportunities AI might provide. Without a  basic literacy in AI specifically, the UK will  miss out on opportunities created by AI  applications, and will be vulnerable to  poor consumer and public decisionmaking, and the dangers of overpersuasive hype or misplaced fear.  Over time, AI needs to be built into the  curriculum as a specialist subject. As well  as being its own subject AI needs to be  part of computer science, citizenship  studies, and as part of new ways of doing  other subjects such as geography or  history. These changes may take a decade  to complete but getting there is essential.  For now, the government should focus  energy on the most effective existing  curriculum enrichment initiatives, not as  alternatives to fundamental changes to  the curriculum, but because they provide  opportunities to accelerate change in the  short term. Further,HigherandGraduate Education Since the AI Review in 2017, the  government has invested significantly in  schemes to promote graduate-level  learning through Apprenticeships,  Masters courses and PhD training. This is  a good start, but only that. Current  numbers would suggest there is unmet demand to justify a five to tenfold  increase in places compared to the  numbers in the AIReview . To ensure a steady supply of skilled  entrants to the workforce, and to send  the right signals to young people making  further academic choices, the UK should  commit to scaling up its programmes  significantly at all levels of education and  maintain this commitment for at least a  decade.  Such a scale up would include AI-related  Level 7 apprenticeships, Masters  programmes, Centres for Doctoral  Training and novel forms of PhDs. It would  extend the scope of the schemes to  include AI-related courses in disciplines  outside those traditionally associated with  data sciences, with a review of digital  apprenticeship standards to identify  where additional AI knowledge and skills  ought to be unlocked. It must also include  the postgraduate AI and data science  conversion course programme  announced by the government last year,  whose 2,500 places for people to develop  new skills or re-train. Properly  implemented, this commitment would  help level up access to economic  development across regions. We must  also ensure that no graduate student  leaves university without some grounding  in AI and its applications.2.Skillsand Diversity 17Decrypting diversity: Diversity and inclusion in cyber security , NCSC (July 2020)
18AI ROADMAP SKILLS AND DIVERSITY 19 Meanwhile the Turing AI Fellowships  programme for established researchers,  an international fellowship programme  for AI in the UK in a partnership between  UKRI, the Office for AI, and the Turing, has  already seen a successful first wave,18 alongside the first batch of Turing AI  Acceleration Fellowships.19In line with the  2017 AIReview , this programme must  continue to be developed and expanded  so that momentum can be built to attract  world-leading talent to the UK. These efforts, directed at the supply side,  would allow graduates and apprentices  to advance into emerging AI professions.  They would need to be delivered across  the country and to be available to young  people of all backgrounds, ensuring that  the UK’s future AI workforce reflects the  diversity of background and thought  needed to develop world leading AI  capabilities that tackle the issues which  matter most. Success will depend on  collaboration between universities,  colleges and businesses, not only in  terms of how academia can help support  continuous learning and upskilling within  businesses, but also through business  support such as mentoring, real life use  cases and data to academia. Supportingeveryteacher The key to progress in schools is to  enable teachers to have confidence in  the basics themselves, so they can make  the best possible choices about how to  engage their students. One way to make  progress relatively fast would be to extend the work of the NCCE, supporting  it to provide comprehensive curriculum  resources that cover AI at all Key Stages,  and providing an incentive and  opportunity for teachers to learn and  develop their AI knowledge. A  comprehensive programme aimed at all  teachers and with a clear deadline for  completion would enable every teacher  confidently to get to grips with AI  concepts in ways that are relevant to  their own teaching.  As in many other subjects, learning  should combine access to knowledge  about AI with exercises based on tackling  real-world problems in ways that  encourage the skills associated with  problem-solving (including creativity and  resilience) and team-working. Therefore  new curriculum resources need to  include curated data sets that will enable  teachers to create the case studies and  exercises that will in turn create the  familiarity that leads all young people to  increased confidence and data literacy. Lifelonglearningandanonline academyforAI Looking across society, the scale of reskilling and up-skilling that will be  required is vast when you consider a  population whose working lives may last  more than half a century beyond the time  they left school, college or university. The  UK must contend with changing business  models in goods and services, and the  changing nature of professions and  trades, and the priority of levelling up. These challenges point to the need for  significant change in the contract  between the state, individual and  employer and a step change in the scale  of continuous professional development  and the ability to move between types of  work.  While these socio-economic trends cut  across sectors and subjects, they  represent an even more urgent challenge  in AI where the required skills have  recently emerged and are still changing  rapidly.20The government should  consider the two following major steps.  The first is extending business tax relief  from investment in research,  development and innovation to  investment in specified forms of retraining  and upskilling, including AI. A second step would be to enable the  creation of an Online Academy for AI.  Such an Academy could provide a key part  of the social infrastructure necessary to  support systemic change. Properly  designed, such an Academy would  provide the opportunity efficiently and  creatively to meet several overlapping  needs which emerge from different parts  of this Roadmap. It might start by  providing entry-level material to support  life-long learning. Ideally, this would be  accredited in a recognisable and portable  way. In doing this it could also provide an  entry-point and repository for online  learning aimed at teachers,  complementing the work of bodies such  as the NCCE, and it would encourage the growing national community of product  managers retooling for the future in AI.  Either separately, or integrated into the  Academy, a ‘data skills observatory’ to  identify and address the on-going and  evolving data skills deficit function that  would otherwise hinder AI innovation  would also be needed. While the Academy’s main objective  would be to enable more people to live  and work with AI, it would also be well  placed to help connect and support local  initiatives involving public engagement  and public dialogue as part of responsible  innovation in new AI deployments,  including moonshots. This sustained and  distributed resource, rather than, say, a  single educational or promotional  campaign, would be an integral part of  negotiating the benefits and the risks of AI  across different applications and publics  and finding new forms of settlement and  new narratives. It would help to ensure  that trustworthy information, in relevant  and accessible forms, informed public  narratives on AI across sectors and  applications. It would need to be able to  reach into the forefront of research,  development and innovation, such as  through the Turing, and to connect  people and information for discussions  on opportunities, the distribution of  benefits and of risks, shortcomings and  uncertainties. This kind of resource would in turn  underpin the regulatory infrastructure  that is outlined in the next section, by  ensuring that public debates were  consistently well-informed. 18Welcoming world-class Turing AI Fellows to the Institute , The Alan Turing Institute (October 2019) 19New Turing AI fellows to deliver world-class AI research , UKRI (November 2020) 20Short, online courses can unblock gender and other diversity issues in digital skills education , Institute of Coding (September 2020)
20AI ROADMAP 21 TheUKshouldaspiretobethebest placeintheworldtoaccessanduse safe,secureandgoodqualitydatain ordertodevelopnewapplicationsand businessmodels. The UK should also be the best place for  the public to exercise scrutiny of, and  input to, automated decision making, in  order to ensure the public can trust AI. To  do this, the infrastructure it will need is  not only physical, such as broadband  networks and high performance  computing capacity, but also virtual and  social, encompassing processes, people,  standards, governance and practices. A  systemic reimagining of data availability  and governance will be required across  disciplines to transform traditional  practices and public acceptability. As for other infrastructure assets of  national importance, the government has  a key role in funding and providing data infrastructure. An important component  to this should be in creating a crosssectoral Information Management  Framework that is AI-friendly and  designed for clean, codified, real-time  data so that it forms the best possible  basis for private and public sector  innovation. Trustworthyandaccessibledata AI thrives on data, and makes new  demands on data collection, curation and  use. The government should focus its  plans to make more public sector data  safely and securely available, being clear  about which data will be increasingly  available, under what conditions and on  what timescale. In the private sector,  while regulators have begun good work  to audit AI for personal data protection  compliance21, more work is needed to  help businesses seeking to use data for  AI by creating the conditions for the deployment of suitable privacy enhancing  technologies.22This should be furthered  by accelerating work on translating the  intent of a data sharing agreement into an  actionable legal framework, and  establishing guidelines for legal  frameworks around different data sharing  structures such as trusts, cooperatives  and contracts.  It will be important to note that while  some AI systems will continue to rely on  access to the largest possible data sets,  volume should not be the only priority for  schemes to promote access: some of the  next generation of AI technologies will be  designed to work with much smaller data  sets. This illustrates a more general  principle which is that the detailed  infrastructure needed to make AI work in  different markets is often very contextspecific, and the UK will need a National  AI Strategy that links general principles to  industry-specific arrangements of  governance to enable innovation and  growth. One need shared by many  markets, however, is in establishing data  infrastructure to permit companies to  safely share and access data to develop  common AI-related products. The public  sector should lead the way with examples  of good data sharing practices. Good AI research, development and  innovation relies on a bedrock of good  data practices and there is much to do to  improve the current position. This  includes embedding data principles such  as FAIR (Findable, Accessible  Interoperable, Reusable), adopting open licences where possible, working better  with multi-modal data (big data, small  data, noisy data, unstructured data) and  enforcing an agreed supporting  framework on what it means ethically and  for society to share data for research  purposes, and who owns it.  Ultimately, developers of AI applications  ought to consider the opening and  sharing of research, analytics and data at  the fundamental design stage. This  should include encouraging digital  research, development and innovation  infrastructure, software and tools to be  open and standardised; providing access  to large-scale compute and data  resources tuned to AI applications; and  supporting the development and  deployment of Trusted Research  Environments, which enables  collaboration and data access across  several organisations. While previous work around best  practices in data management and use  has been helpful in setting the direction  of travel, there remains a gap between  the aspirations set out in these principles  and their implementation, creating an  additional barrier to the development of  effective data access frameworks. Further  work is needed to build a common  language amongst data practitioners,  building understanding of the nature of  the datasets being used and how best to  manage them. In many cases, data can  outlive the systems that collected it, and  conscious investment in trustworthy  systems that can outlive the lifecycle of 3.Data, Infrastructure andPublicTrust 21Guidance on AI and Data Protection , ICO (2020) 22Privacy Enhancing Technologies , The Royal Society (March 2019)
22AI ROADMAP DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST 23 our standard modes of data  management will reap many benefits. The emergence of a small number of big  players in several digital markets has  sparked a timely debate on the proper  role of government and regulators in  preserving and enhancing competition  across the digital economy. The role of  data as a driver of concentration and  potential barrier to entry for smaller firms  has been a central theme of recent  reviews.23The government has also  recognised the growing importance of  data access and openness to promoting  competition and innovation, having  established a dedicated Digital Markets  Unit to advise on the functions,  processes and powers which may be  needed to address the challenges posed  by fast-moving digital markets.24 Whatever the government’s final decision,  clear and flexible regulation will be critical  to supporting good data practices, and  can help to level the playing field for new  entrants into digital and data-driven  markets. There remains much to be done  in interpreting existing data rules to  support research, development and  innovation and well-resourced,  independent regulators can assist in  providing guidance.  In addition to these systemic changes,  the government might consider  enhancing the nations’ approach to data  governance: making sure data is  collected, used and shared in responsible  and trustworthy ways. Not appropriately addressing data governance frameworks  would maintain a fundamental barrier to  the adoption and diffusion of AI  technologies and inhibit the quality of  wider sources of data. We recommend a  coalition of institutions and experts work  together to develop standard data  sharing agreements compliant with data  protection and intellectual property law  but providing practical exemplars,  especially for business-to-business data  sharing that could be adapted and  adopted across the economy. Without a  strong system of data governance,  existing tenuous public trust in data use  and sharing will persist, impairing the  UK’s long-term leadership ambitions. Publictrustandgood governance Threaded throughout discussions about  AI is the need for adaptive and informed  regulation and standards as part of an  enabling environment of good  governance, which includes public  engagement, transparency measures and  responsible research and innovation on  the part of businesses through the  lifecycle of AI operations. Achieving such  a robust system of good governance is  crucial to building the public trust and  confidence in AI that will be essential to  its uptake and long-term public  acceptability.  Recent events have demonstrated that  public and private sector AI and  algorithmic applications continue to be  plagued by public scepticism and lack widespread legitimacy. Developing and  deploying trustworthy AI will be  dependent on the UK strengthening its  governing environment in a manner that  both provides guidance and confidence to  businesses to innovate and adopt AI, and  reassures the public that the use of AI is  safe, secure, fair, ethical and duly  overseen by independent entities. This is  beginning to be addressed in the National  Data Strategy,25but further exploration  and scrutiny of appropriate governance  mechanisms, particularly concerning  public sector adoption of AI, is overdue.  We highlight one example in this section -  a public interest data bill - that may serve  as a method of increasing accountability  through public engagement. It is clear that there remains a  fundamental mismatch between the logic  of the market and the logic of the law.  Technology markets extract value from  collective data while laws respond to  individual opportunities and threats. This  has a critical impact on the public  acceptability of data as infrastructure -  data supported by people, processes and  technology - and will only worsen if it is  not sufficiently addressed.  One method that could begin to combine  new forms of innovation and  accountability is to involve the public in  considering new ways to complement  individual rights-based approaches such  as consent. These would include new  ways of ensuring public scrutiny of  automated decision-making and the types  of transparency that lead to accountability: revealing the purposes and  training data behind algorithms, as well as  looking at their impacts. They would  include public engagement, including in  algorithmic impact assessments. And they  would look to ensure that existing  regulations and regulatory bodies had not  only the capacity, but also the capability to  fully consider the implications of AI in  areas such as labour, environmental, and  criminal law. These three tenets: (1) clear  transparency about automated decision  making, (2) the right to give meaningful  public input and (3) the ability to enforce  sanctions could be encapsulated in a  Public Interest Data Bill.26 Fundamental to the development of AI  systems is access to data. The UK’s  response to the COVID-19 pandemic has  highlighted gaps in the UK’s capabilities in  this space, in particular around the  governance of ‘happenstance’ data,  generated by individuals in the course of  their daily activities.27Trustworthy access  to such data can help generate insights  for public policy and research, enabling  the government to better understand the  impact of its policy interventions in  rapidly-evolving circumstances. Their  expertise in the collection and  management of data means the Office for  National Statistics is well-placed to lead  the development of governance  frameworks for these new data sources.  Government should enhance their role in  this respect through the National Data  Strategy and associated policy  frameworks. 23‘Unlocking digital competition’ , Report of the Digital Competition Expert Panel, UK Government (2019) 24New competition regime for tech giants to give consumers more choice and control over their data, and ensure businesses are fairly treated , UK Government (November 2020) 25National Data Strategy , UK Government (September 2020). Mission 2 regards a pro-growth and trusted data regime, and Mission 3 concerns transforming the government's use of data. 26The Data Delusion: Protecting Individual Data Isn't Enough When The Harm is Collective , FSI Stanford (July 2020) 27Data readiness: lessons from an emergency , DELVE Report No 7 (November 2020)
24AI ROADMAP DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST 25 Making the UK the best place in the  world to research and use AI requires it  to be world-leading in the provision of  responsive regulation and governance.  While fundamental principles of good  governance may be fixed and apply  across sectors, the details will not, and  this means that the systems of  governance themselves need to be ready  to respond and adapt more frequently  than has typically been true of systems of  governance in the past. We therefore  suggest commissioning an independent  entity to provide recommendations on  the next steps in the evolution of  governance mechanisms, including  impact and risk assessments, best  practice principles, ethical processes and  institutional mechanisms that will  increase and sustain public trust.  Public trust in the applications of AI and  algorithms depends on the  trustworthiness of these applications and  those that develop and implement these.  Good governance also needs to  encourage good culture amongst the  individuals and organisations that are  responsible for the development and  application of advanced information  technology. At the same time, the UK  needs to continue investing in dataspecific regulatory capacity and  algorithmic accountability, ensuring that  institutions are well funded to cover the  advisory, enforcement and regulatory  landscapes as sector digitalisation  continues at pace. UK governance should  combine sector-specific expertise with  cross-sector insights, bringing regulators in different sectors together to connect  with each other and begin to experiment  with new ways of encouraging safe AI  innovation across and within their remit. DigitalTwinsandLivingLabs Applying AI systems responsibly inevitably  requires a great deal of development  before getting anywhere near the  physical world. Digital twins (a realistic  representation of assets, processes,  systems or institutions in the built,  societal or natural environments) are  increasingly recognised as important in  many fields as they can provide insight  into how complex physical assets and  citizens behave in real time and can help  organisations improve decision-making  and optimising processes. An expanded  programme to advance digital twin  capability, with interoperable data  standards, could help developers explore  the potential for applications in the  physical world but cheaper, faster and  with less risk, as well as a better  understanding of the implications and  impacts to society and the economy. AI  thrives when stitching digital twins  together, using machine learning  algorithms to analyse complex patterns  and make decisions between different  processes and systems alongside  generating new insights with newly  hybridised datasets.  The National Digital Twin Programme,  currently being driven by the Centre for  Digital Built Britain, aims to create an  Information Management Framework to enable the building of digital twins across  the built environment. Building on this  work, a more ambitious cross-sectoral UK  Digital Twin programme, governed by the  Gemini Principles28, would be a moonshot  challenge and would encourage more  widespread use of open synthetic data to  develop AI applications in many specific  potential applications where the risks to  individuals or society might otherwise be  large. AI could also use these digital twins  to explore real world optimisations that  are beyond human scale. In developing those AI applications and AI  models and testing with synthetic data,  there comes a point when you must begin  to model and rehearse in the real world  with messy, unpredictable and diverse  environments. To achieve this in a safe  way without causing inadvertent harm,  the UK needs to create a nationwide  network of living laboratories, physical  environments that start as  representations of the real world but  more constrained.  AI will provide the embedded intelligence  within all manner of new smart machines,  many with autonomous capabilities, that  can work collaboratively with humans to  transform their productivity, safety and  quality of life. By enabling the fast and  safe development, testing and  demonstration of new AI-based goods  and services, including distributed  software systems and intelligence  embodied in smart machines and  products, businesses, researchers and citizens can gather the data and  experience necessary to inform future  policy, regulation, products and services. Agloballyleadingrole Finally, the UK should urgently and  sustainably build upon its strong  international position. It is one of the top  three countries in terms of research  publications in AI.29This strength  combined with the UK’s diplomatic weight  can be a catalyst to shape international  discussions, but our leading international  position is not guaranteed. We should  therefore strengthen existing  partnerships with other like-minded  countries, such as France and Canada as  well as consider carefully how to increase  bilateral cooperation with countries like  the US and China, such as through the  recent declaration signed with the US to  increase collaboration on AI R&D,30to  enable effective strategic action to shape  a global AI landscape. One immediate way  forward is to leverage our founding  membership in the Global Partnership for  AI (GPAI), a scalable club of like-minded  governments ready to be led by experts  on tackling the most pressing priorities  for collaboration, where the UK is already  leading on data governance.31 The UK has a pivotal opportunity to play  an influential role in the coming year as it  adopts the Presidency of the G7 and the  26th UN Climate Change conference.  Over this period the UK should use this  opportunity to leverage global collective  28The Gemini Principles were developed by the Centre for Digital Built Britain to guide the responsible development of digital twins and a National Digital Twin for the public good.  The Gemini Principles Centre for Digital Built Britain (2018) 29Global AI Talent Report 2020 , (October 2020); AI Research Rankings 2019 , Medium (December 2019) 30Declaration of the USA and the UK on Cooperation in AI Research and Development , UK Government (September 2020) 31An open call for input from GPAI’s Data Governance Working Group , OECD (November 2020); we understand the recommendations from this working group will be incorporated  into the National Data Strategy.
26AI ROADMAP DATA, INFRASTRUCTURE AND PUBLIC TRUST 27 intelligence to advise on the biggest  challenges AI presents and position the  UK as a centre to operationalise  recommendations, including those  relating to the UN’s Sustainable  Development Goals. Alongside global leadership on shared  challenges, the UK ought to consider its  own strategic advantage as we  endeavour to become less dependent on  critical technologies from non-allied  sources of supply. Advancements in AI  products and services underpin the  capacity to compete economically but is  also the domain of contests between  overseas power bases and other nation  states, which are sometimes not well  aligned to the UK interest. One way to  respond to this shift in geopolitical  context is to invest strategically in  research, development and innovation,  choosing areas of national strengths such  as AI and supporting them heavily with  the aim of becoming globally competitive.  If we align this strategic investment with  the construction of broad coalitions of  interest on the global stage, the UK can  increase our sovereign capabilities and  attract researchers and technologists  with the skills to develop leading  products in a number of competitive  sectors. Government should also  consider how to redefine procurement  and intellectual property to encourage a  creative technology ecosystem to achieve  these aims.  
28AI ROADMAP 29 Theprecedingsectionsoutlinethe pillarsthatwouldprovidethebasisfor sustaineduptakeofAIacrossthe countryandtheeconomyasawhole. This section proposes transitional and  other more specific measures to boost  initial take up and to evolve existing  markets in the crucial areas of business  adoption, startup & scale-up support,  public sector adoption, health and social  care, climate change, and defence. Businessassmartadopters Across society and the economy, and  since the first weeks of 2020, the COVID19 pandemic has accelerated the  adoption of digital systems such as ecommerce platforms and marketplaces,  and tools to enable remote working. The  UK therefore has an opportunity to build  on this momentum to showcase and  reward the uptake of AI by encouraging further investment and enabling  business, especially SMEs, to be smart  consumers for AI systems. Creating confidence so that business  customers increasingly seek out AI  solutions, knowing that they will be able  to get sound advice and robust products,  is crucial. There is further need to build  on grants to access impartial advice on  how to use digital and AI solutions to  help the growth of SMEs that have been  exacerbated by the COVID crisis.  Scotland’s Data Lab is a good example of  an initiative that fosters trusted  collaboration between industry and AI  expertise, having invested in 120  Collaborative Innovation Projects at  approximately £12 million value over the  last 5 years, and recently launched a  Torch Business Advisory Service to  support SMEs on their data journey. The largest companies that are able to  realise the potential of AI through  business transformation find themselves  increasing productivity, reducing costs  and innovating faster to remain  competitive. By ensuring the enabling  foundations described in the first 10  recommendations are in place, the UK  can also be a fertile ground for its existing  FTSE 100 and the future 100. SupportinghighgrowthAI startups As these businesses initiatives stimulate  demand for AI products, we need to  ensure that the AI startup and scaleup  vendor ecosystem thrives. Supporting AIfirst businesses by providing the  necessary physical infrastructure to offer  services to the largest and smallest local  and multinational companies would help  these businesses scale, develop and  become the next multi billion dollar  companies. The government should encourage more  initiatives like Tech Nation’s Applied AI  Program32to directly support smaller  startups to grow across the UK. The  community welcomed an additional £200  million from the British Business Bank  which increased VC funding to high  growth companies,33 and there is a  compelling argument to increase this  funding, or alternatively to consider public  investment in promising companies that  seek to advance government priorities in  a similar style to the National Security  Strategic Investment Fund. For scaleups, the funding gap that exists at series B+  means that AI companies struggle to stay  under UK ownership. Government may  consider supporting at this stage to  ensure companies can take foreign  investments in these rounds while also  staying in the UK as they grow. The UK government needs to assist  startups and scaleups to compete most  effectively for the best talent. The Study  Visa program may need to be extended  now we have left the European Union. To  this end, there is a prominent role for the  government to position the UK as the goto AI startup location in the region. It’s  important to spread the message that the  UK has more capital and talent than  anywhere else34and a unique proximity of  buyer to vendor as well as being far easier  to incorporate and run a business here  than in Europe.  To increase the number of SMEs and  build the right entrepreneurial  infrastructure for AI-first companies, it is  also worth exploring the possibility of  building on Innovate UK’s Knowledge  Transfer Partnerships (KTPs), in which the  government could introduce a series of  AI-specific KTPs to stimulate market ready  AI research in areas of direct relevance to  businesses to commercialise research.  The UK currently lacks a prominent cohort  of professionals who understand the  complex sales and leadership skills  needed to build, articulate and sell AI  tools and develop leaders of AI research  labs, and there is concurrently a specific 4.National, Cross-sector Adoption 32Applied AI , Tech Nation (2020) 33Extra £200 million backing for British businesses , British Business Bank (April 2019) 34Tech Nation Impact Report , Tech Nation (2020); UK Tech For A Changing World , Tech Nation (2020)
30AI ROADMAP NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION 31 demand to increase the number of  skilled product managers in AI. We  recommend a marketing campaign and  programs to encourage international  product managers to come to the UK,  and for UK citizens to focus their  education or re-skilling in this direction.  This would help turbo charge the UK’s  ability to effectively commercialise the  world class research coming out of our  universities. Enablingpublicsectoradoption The UK public sector will be a priority  area when it comes to AI innovation.  Improving policy-making processes (for  example, ensuring it is more resilient to  shocks to the system), and the provision  of more efficient and effective public  services (for example, using data-driven  ‘real-time’ economic forecasts), built on  strong ethical foundations, will become  essential to improve the security and  well-being of citizens. There is an urgent need to have a digitally  and data enabled local and national  government. To leverage the  opportunities of AI in the public sector,  there will need to be new ways of  ensuring that data can be accessed and  evaluated across public sector  organisations. The government should  ensure there is a central place for civil  servants to access information about all  of the AI-based tools and projects being  undertaken across departments. AI  should be used in projects that are  outcome-based and only where absolutely appropriate, and departments  should learn rapidly from each other  about what works well and what needs to  evolve. In time, the focus should be on  linking public sector data with private  sector data, rapidly enhancing the  insights that can be gained through  diverse datasets and a more  sophisticated adoption of AI.35 Government should fund interdisciplinary  pathfinder projects – requiring  collaboration between industries and  across government departments, with  different academic disciplines – as a  means of demonstrating the potential of  AI technologies to support pathfinder  projects and building capability in the civil  service to deliver such projects.  Importantly, the application of AI in the  public sector should not fall explicitly on  one department to lead. It may be that a  Chief Information Officer embedded in  the heart of government would work well  to provide the strategic direction and  leadership required for such a multistakeholder task. The huge benefits of data sharing will be  worth little unless government  departments are enabled to intelligently  procure products that suit different  contexts and services. More work is  needed to demystify algorithmic decision  making in government, with training  programs for officials so they can suitably  assess AI systems for themselves and see  how it would be deployed as part of an  increasingly efficient civil service. The  ONS is working towards a target of 500 data analysts across government trained  in data science techniques this year,36 and  to enable a more thorough upskilling of AI  and machine learning analysis, work  should intertwine with the Turing, the  Royal Society, the Royal Statistical Society  and others in determining how data  science and AI practitioners may be  professionally standardised. Public sector bodies wishing to adopt AI  often face challenges in building  procurement capability. Governments  have tried to enable public procurement  to better support innovative goods and  services, while ensuring value for money  and relatively low risk. This government  should continue to build on initiatives that  have worked, such as GovTech and the  guidelines for AI procurement,37to allow  the public sector to effectively purchase  emerging tech such as AI. Greater AI  adoption in the public sector through  public sector procurement creates  markets for data science and AI  technologies to be developed, tested and  deployed by government departments, to  enable a pull-through of innovation from  research, often via SMEs. It is important to note that evidence  shows the human rights of the poorest  and most vulnerable are especially at risk  when public services are automated.38As  such we suggest this work is done  carefully and with independent ethics committees tasked to consider ethics,  including social and economic impacts. Healthandsocialcare The demands on healthcare are changing  rapidly as populations drift, age, and their  needs evolve, and with a huge reduction  in the cost of measurement. With this  ubiquity of such data, informed and  improved interventions through  prioritisation and personalisation can  maximise benefit. Given the social and economic  importance of health and the UK’s  potential to build on market opportunities  created by the NHS, the sector has been,  and should continue to be, at the  forefront of AI adoption. The importance  of the link between health, mental health  and social care has been especially clear  during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we  have also seen areas in which AI could  have been better prepared to deal with  that link if we had considered the promise  of AI in this sector earlier. AI can help  manage the complex information flow  that is needed for the integration of these  systems. NHSX, in delivering the Health  Secretary’s Tech Vision39, is taking the lead  in unblocking issues including (but not  limited to) governance, data access and  protection, and inclusion. The Council,  who are supporting NHSX with their AI  Lab40and AI Awards,41looks to NHSX to  work with others across the research,  35There is a fundamental need to consider transparency and data bias as public sector adoption increases, taking into account analysis and recommendations from, among  others: Review on Artificial Intelligence and Public Standards , The Committee on Standards in Public Life (February 2020); CDEI review into bias in algorithmic decision-making , Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (November 2020) 36Looking to the future at the Data Science Campus , Office for National Statistics (March 2019) 37Guidelines for AI Procurement , UK Government (June 2020). Developed in collaboration with the World Economic Forum Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. 38Statement on the Visit to the United Kingdom, by Professor Philip Alston, United Nations Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights , United Nations Human  Rights Office of the High Commissioner (November 2018)  39The future of healthcare: our vision for digital, data and technology in health and care , UK Government (October 2018) 40The NHS AI Lab , NHSX (2020) 41Artificial Intelligence in Health and Care Award , NHSX (November 2020)
32AI ROADMAP NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION 33 development and innovation landscape  to continue building towards these  opportunities and developing best  practice guidance for AI adoption in the  healthcare sector.  As the adoption of AI increases outside of  the hospital setting, so too will the  ‘datafication’ of networked digital  technologies which create new health  insights for individuals. This carries  abundant opportunities for the  preventative health of citizens, for  example in stimulating new and more  efficient ways to diagnose and prevent  disease beyond clinical boundaries, but  there are also significant concerns if not  governed correctly. Individuals’ health  quickly becomes legible to actors outside  medical and clinical settings, for example  inferred sensitive personal information  held by online platforms, and appropriate  oversight ought to be considered in how  these technologies develop.  We also encourage further development  in areas with others in the sector where  the UK can build a competitive  advantage. Three particular areas stand  out: the first is in creating a data strategy  for health and care, which achieves clean,  codified and real-time data with a strong  sectoral data governance framework. The  second is the opportunity to develop new  models of partnership and incentives for  partnerships between SMEs and the NHS  that flourish and scale beyond ideation.  The third opportunity would be to create  a better understanding of the skills and  knowledge required for citizens and healthcare professionals living and  working with AI technologies, building  especially on the Topol review42and NHS  Digital Academy. Finally, building on the UK’s world-leading  life sciences industry and increasingly  digitally mature NHS, there is an  opportunity to establish the UK as the  go-to-place for biomedical research. With  the appropriate governance in place, and  through closer collaboration of the life  sciences industry and the NHS, AI has the  potential to empower large national trials  more efficiently, including through the  seamless adaptation of subjects to  treatments. Climatechange AI technologies are an essential part of  the toolbox for innovating to reduce  greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,  and to reduce the environmental impacts  of goods, services and human activities.  We are already seeing AI contributing to a  greater grasp of complex environmental  and sustainability systems, from  forecasting supply and demand at realtime43to combating illegal deforestation44 and understanding Arctic sea ice loss.45 One way to accelerate the use of AI for  these purposes would be to build it into  relevant moonshots, such as that on new  materials for energy storage and  renewables and create incentives for AI  companies to address these and other  Net Zero challenges.The challenges to increased adoption of  AI in related sectors, particularly in energy,  has been explored elsewhere46but echo  similar constraints in other sectors,  notably in the accessibility, interoperability  and labelling of datasets that can  contribute to cross-sector cooperation on  energy and climate initiatives. The reality  is also that the continued development of  digital technologies, including AI and  complementary technologies such as 5G  and the Internet of Things, create an  environmental impact that also needs to  be monitored. As a part of the UK’s globally leading role  in AI, there is an opportunity to carve out  a leading path on the global stage where  others see a similar need to increase the  role of AI in energy and climate for public  good. The UK should consider drawing up  a plan that ensures responsible AI is  suitable for the planet and helps build  broader awareness, inform regulation,  and incentivise researchers and  developers to make more conscious and  accountable decisions in these areas.  Ahead of COP26, the UK should consider  how to develop and showcase the UK’s  ability in cleantech, which spans the entire  country and represents a successful,  innovative path to Net Zero,47and use its  spotlight to encourage an open,  international digital ecosystem of data,  algorithms and insights that can generate reliable information in real-time about the  state of the environment and interactions  between the economy, society and the  environment. Defenceandsecurity AI is central to a broad range of defence  and security applications, which are  becoming increasingly data rich and  networked. They require multiple sources  of information to be brought together to  understand a rapidly evolving situation, to  determine a timely course of action and  to oversee the enactment of the  response. The information involved is  often multi-modal (text, audio and video)  and is invariably uncertain, incomplete  and contradictory. Sometimes it is also  intentionally misleading. AI methods are  necessary to make sense of this volume,  variety and velocity of information.  However, further developments are  required to scale the underpinning fusion  techniques, to have them work in closer  partnership with the humans involved,  and to ensure the ensuing decisions and  plans can be understood and justified. The increased connectivity of all aspects  of our society means that digital assets  are increasingly common, and valuable  and physical assets are increasingly  accessible remotely. These bring  tremendous benefits, but also open up  42The Topol Review advised the government on implementing technologies such as AI in the NHS and to enable NHS staff to make the most of them to improve services. The Topol Review , NHS (February 2019)  43Solar nowcasting with machine vision , The Alan Turing Institute (current research) 44The fight against illegal deforestation with TensorFlow , Google (March 2018) 45Understanding Arctic sea ice loss , The Alan Turing Institute (current research) 46AI Barometer Report , Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (June 2020) 47UK Tech For A Changing World , Tech Nation (2020)
34AI ROADMAP NATIONAL, CROSS-SECTOR ADOPTION 35 opportunities for interference and  disruption, leading to a requirement for a  secure, connected intelligence. AI  techniques are necessary to monitor the  complexity of these networked systems  and to determine when they are  operating normally and when they are  not. As cyber-attacks become  increasingly sophisticated, AI is needed to  detect and respond to them. We welcome the commitment to create a  new MOD agency for AI, and look forward  to further detail in the Integrated Review  in 2021. We are now living in a challenging  economic and geopolitical environment  in which global tech companies hold  sway over national strategic advantages.  By strengthening our ties with likeminded nations, the UK can increase our  capabilities in co-creating technological  developments, drawing innovations from  oblique application areas and developing  leading products which are then adopted  by our allies. The broader AI community  will be required to engage in this space  as the security sector becomes more  pervasive, and the government will need  to find ways of working across  demanding security frameworks to  enable wider collaboration. Part of opening up wider collaboration on  this front will require new levels of  internationally competitive investment in  advanced hardware technologies that  serve the UK ecosystem, as the driving  force behind fast and secure innovation. Co-creation – at scale – of technological  developments in an application agnostic  environment (benefiting from innovations  from other application areas) could be a  potential model. This would also provide  additional benefits to improved  technological export capabilities for  Britain, and further benefits to attracting  world-class technologists and innovators  in this space, not seen in Britain since the  1980s.  
36AI ROADMAP 37 AICouncil SirAdrianSmithFRS InstituteDirectorandChiefExecutive, TheAlanTuringInstitute PresidentElectofTheRoyalSociety AliceBentinckMBE Co-founder,EntrepreneurFirst AnnCairns ExecutiveVice-Chairman,MasterCard ChristopherBishopFRSFRSEFREng LaboratoryDirector, MicrosoftResearchCambridge ProfessorofComputerScience, UniversityofEdinburgh ClaireCraigCBE Provost,TheQueen’sCollegeOxford DavidLaneCBE,PhDFREngFRSE ProfessorandFoundingDirector, EdinburghCentreforRobotics KritiSharma Founder,AIforGood MáireO'NeillFREng Professor,CentreforSecureInformation Technologies,Queen'sUniversityBelfast MarcWarner ChiefExecutiveOfficer,Faculty SirMarkWalportFRSFRCPFRCPath FMedSciFRSE ChiefExecutive,UKResearchand Innovation,2017to2020MartinTisné ManagingDirector,Luminate NeilLawrence DeepMindProfessorofMachineLearning, UniversityofCambridge NickJenningsCB,FREng Vice-ProvostforResearchandEnterprise, ImperialCollegeLondon Professor,ArtificialIntelligence, ImperialCollegeLondon DamePatriciaHodgsonDBE MemberoftheBoard, CentreforDataEthicsandInnovation PaulClarkeCBE ChiefTechnologyOfficer,OcadoGroup 2012to2020 PeteBurnap ProfessorofDataScience&Cybersecurity, CardiffUniversity PriyaLakhaniOBE FounderandCEO,CENTURYTech RachelDunscombe CEO,NHSDigitalAcademy VisitingProfessor,ImperialCollegeLondon TabithaGoldstaub Co-founder,CognitionX UKAIBusinessChampion Chair,AICouncil DameWendyHall DBE,FRSFREng RegiusProfessorofComputerScience, UniversityofSouthampton UKAISkillsChampionIn October 2019 the Council put out a call for  any interested individuals to be part of a wider  ecosystem, to contribute to the Council’s work.  Over 450 people responded, and the Council is  grateful to them for their contributions over the  last few months, including for their views on this  Roadmap. This includes: Adrian Joseph OBE, ManagingDirector, GroupAIandDataSolutions,BT Adrian Weller, ProgramDirectorforAI, TheAlanTuringInstitute Alexandra Mousavizadeh, Director, TortoiseIntelligenceteam Andrew Hopper CBE FRS FIET FREng, Vice-President,TheRoyalSociety Brent Hoberman CBE, ExecutiveChairmanand Co-founder,FoundersFactory Carly Kind, Director,AdaLovelaceInstitute Demis Hassabis CBE FRS FREng FRSA, CEOandco-founder,DeepMind Frank Kelly CBE, ProfessoroftheMathematicsof Systems,UniversityofCambridge Gerard Grech, CEO,TechNation Gillian Docherty OBE, CEO,TheDataLabScotland Hayaatun Sillem CBE FIET, CEO, RoyalAcademyofEngineering Sir Ian Diamond FBA FRSE FAcSS DL, UKNationalStatistician Indra Joshi, DirectorofArtificialIntelligence,NHSX Jeni Tennison OBE, Vice-President, OpenDataInstitute John Spindler, CEO,CapitalEnterpriseAcknowledgements Julia Adamson, DirectorofEducation, BritishComputerSociety Lila Ibrahim, COO,DeepMind Professor Dame Lynn Gladden DBE FRS FRSC  FInstP FREng, ExecutiveChair,EPSRC Matthew Taylor CBE FAcSS, CEO,TheRoyal SocietyfortheEncouragementofArts, ManufacturesandCommerce Professor Dame Ottoline Leyser DBE FRS,  ChiefExecutive,UKResearchandInnovation Sir Patrick Vallance FRS FMedSci FRCP, UKGovernment’sChiefScientificAdviser Philip Colligan, CEO,RaspberryPi Roger Taylor, Chair,CentreforDataEthics andInnovation Saul Klein, Co-founder,LocalGlobe Simon McDougall, Director,Technology& Innovation,InformationCommissioner’sOffice Simon Peyton Jones FRS MAE, Chair, NationalCentreforComputingEducation Stan Boland, CEO,FiveAI Stian Westlake, CEO,RoyalStatisticalSociety Stuart Russell, ProfessorofComputerScience, UniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley Lord Tim Clement Jones CBE FRSA, Co-chair, AIAll-PartyParliamentaryGroup Vanessa Lawrence CB HonFREng FRICS, Non-ExecDirector,SatelliteApplications CatapultandNon-ExecDirectorandTrustee, TheAlanTuringInstitute Zoubin Ghahramani FRS, ProfessorofInformationEngineering, UniversityofCambridgeWiderAIecosystem
BLANK PAGE
40AI ROADMAPAbout the AI Council The AI Council, an independent expert committee, provides advice to the UK Government and high-level leadership of the Artificial Intelligence ecosystem. The Office for Artificial Intelligence (a joint BEIS-DCMS unit) is secretariat to the AI Council. www.gov.uk/government/groups/ai-council BEIS 1 Victoria Street, London, SW1H 0ET DCMS 100 Parliament Street, London, SW1A 2BQ © Crown copyright 2021 You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or  medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0. To view this  licence, visit OGL or email psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we have  identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain  permission from the copyright holders concerned. Published January 2021 
