                                    The role of A rtificial  Intelligence  in the  European Green Deal   Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies   Directorate -General for Internal Policies   Authors: Peter Gailhofer, Anke Herold, Jan Peter Schemmel, Cara- Sophie  Scherf, Cristina Urrutia, Andreas R. Köhler and Sibylle Braungardt   PE 662.906 – May 2021  EN STUDY   Requested by the AIDA committee  
     
                                      Abstract   Artificial Intelligence ( AI) can be deployed for a wide range of  applications to promote the goals of the European Green Deal .  However , adverse environmental impacts  of AI could jeopardise  the attainment of these goals. The report describes  environmental potential, clarifies characteristics and causes of  environmental risks, and outlines initiatives and best practices for  environm ental policies.  It illustrates  the need for regulatory  action to align design and deployment of AI with the goals of the  European Green Deal  and  concludes with specific  recommendations .   This document was provided  by the Policy Depart ment  for  Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies  at the request of  the Special C ommittee on Artificial Intelligence in a Digital Age  (AIDA ).   The role of A rtificial  Intelligence  in the  European Green Deal    
This document was requested by the European Parliament's special committee on Artificial Intelligence  in a Digital Age .    AUTHORS    Peter  GAILHOFER , Öko -Institut.  e.V.  Anke  HEROLD , Öko -Institut e.V.   Jan Peter SCHEMMEL, Öko -Institut e.V.   Cara -Sophie SCHERF , Öko -Institut e.V.   Cristina URRUTIA , Öko -Institut e.V.   Andreas R. KÖHLER, Öko -Institut e.V.   Sibylle BRAUNGARDT , Öko -Institut e.V.     ADMINISTRATOR S RESPONSIBLE   Matteo CIUCCI   Frédéric GOUARDÈRES     EDITORIAL ASSISTANT   Catherine  NAAS     LINGUISTIC VERSIONS   Original: EN     ABOUT THE EDITOR   Policy departments provide in -house and external expertise to support EP committees and other  parliamentary bodies in shaping legislation and exercising democratic scrutiny over EU internal  policies.     To contact  the Policy Department  or to subscribe for email alert updates,  please write to:    Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies   European Parliament   L-2929 - Luxembourg   Email: Poldep -Economy -Science@ep.europa.eu      Manuscript completed:  May , 2021  Date of publication: May , 2021  © European Union , 2021    This document is available on the i nternet  at:  http://www.europarl.europa.eu/supporting -analyses     DISCLAIMER  AND COPYRIGHT   The opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the authors and do not  necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament.   Reproduction and translation for non -commercial purposes are authorised, provided the sou rce is  acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy.   For citation purposes, the study should be referenced as: Gailhofer, P.  et al. , The role of Artificial  Intelligence in the European Green Deal , Study for the special committee on Artificial Intelligence in a  Digital Age (AIDA) , Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies, European  Parliament, Luxembourg, 2021.   © Cover image used under licenc e from Adobe Stock
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       3 PE 662.906  CONTENTS   LIST OF ABBREVIATION S 5  LIST OF FIGURES  8  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  9  1. INTRODUCTION  12  1.1. The research question: the role of AI in the European Green Deal  12  1.2. Anal ytical Approach  13  1.3. Conceptual issues  13  2. OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN  A SPECTS OF AI AND THE EU GREEN DEAL  16  2.1. The potential role of AI in enhancing the capacities to understand and tackle  environmental chall enges – cr os s -cutting issues  16  2.1.1.  Better information for relevant decision -making  16  2.1.2.  AI applicati ons to inform and encourage responsible business behaviour  17  2.1.3.  AI applications to inform and encourage responsible consumer behaviour  18  2.1.4.  Steering and maintaining technological systems, infrastructure or hazardous  facilities  19  2.1.5.  AI applications to strengthen environ mental administration and participatory  governance 19  2.2. Potential of AI to help reach carbon neutrality and reduce energy consumption and  negative impacts of human activities: sector -specific applications  21  2.2.1.  Overarc hing trends  21  2.2.2.  AI sol utions in the energy sector, in particul ar in the buildings sector  22  2.2.3.  AI sol utions in the transport sector  23  2.2.4.  AI solutions in the agricultural sector  25  2.2.5.  AI solutions in other areas addressed by the European Green Deal (circular economy,  pollution, biodiversity, adaptation to climate change)  27  2.3. State of play and research trends to mitigate the adverse consequences of AI  30  2.3.1.  State of play and research trends in mitigation options to address energy  consumption and resou rce use and waste generation  30  2.3.2.  State of play and research trends regarding systemic adverse impacts and options to  mitigate these risks  34  3. EU PROGRAMMES AND IN TERNATIONAL COOPERAT ION  39  3.1. EU programmes and policies  39  3.2. Internati onal Policies and Programmes  41  3.2.1.  Dialogues and partnerships to understand the potential and to further the  development of AI to contribute to sustainable development  41 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  4  3.2.2.  Initiatives for a common governance of AI in order to ensure its positive contributi on  to sustainable development  43  4. CURRENT TRENDS AND B EST PRACTICES IN AI POLICY AT MEMBER STA TE LEVEL  45  5. RECOMMENDATIONS  49  5.1. Strengthen research on AI systems and their applications for the goals of the European  Green Deal  49  5.2. Develop, promote and implement methodologies for environmental impact assessments  of AI tec hnol ogies  50  5.3. Further monitoring and evaluation of trends required  50  5.4. Empower transformative systems and applications in digital markets  51  5.5. Explore, develop and promote a European model of the data economy harnessing data as  a resource for sustai nable AI  51  5.6. More Member States should integrate the European strategy into their national AI  strategies  52  5.7. Push the EU agenda for AI to support environmental sustainability at the global level  52  REFERENCES  54    
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       5 PE 662.906  LIST OF ABBREVIA TION S  AI Artificial Intelligence   AIDA  Special Committee on Artificial Intelligence in a Digital Age   ARIMA  Autoregressive integrated moving average  BAU  Business as Usual   BCG  Boston Consulting Group   CART  Classification and Regression Tree   CED  Cumulated energy demand   CEF2  The Connecting Europe Facility   CH 4 Methane   CO 2 Carbon dioxide   CODES  Coalition for Digital Environmental Sustainability   DEP  Digital Europe Programme   DNN  Deep neural networks   DVD  Digital Versatile Disc   EC European Commission   EGD  European Green Deal   EIA Ethical Impact Assessment   EO Earth observation   ERTM  European rail  traffic management system   ESA  European Space Agency   EU European Union   FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization   GEO BON  Group on Earth Observations Biodiversity Observation Network  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  6  GHG  Greenhouse gas   GIS  Geographic information system   GPU  Graphical Processing Unit   Gt Gigatonnes = 109 tonnes = 1,000,000,000  ICT Information and communication technologies   IEA International Energy Agency   INSPIRE  Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the EU   IoT Internet of things   IP Internet Protocol   ITU  International Telecommunication Union   JRC  Joint Research Center   LR Linear Regression   LTER  Long Term Ecological Research Network   M2M  Machine -to-machine communication   MILA  Montreal Institute for Learning Algorithms   ML Machine learning   MS Member States   Mt Megatonne   NASA  National Aeronautics and Space Administration   NEON  National Ecological Observatory Network   NLP  Natural language processing   NTNU  Norwegian University of Science and Technology   OECD  Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development   PAWS  Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security (software)  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       7 PE 662.906  PC Personal computers   SARDA  Spot and Runway Departure Advisor   SARIMA  Seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average   SDG  Sustainable Development Goals   SVM  Support Vector Machine   TPU  Tensor Processing Unit (application -specific integrated circuit, to accelerate the AI  calculations and algorithms)   TWh  Terawatt -hour s  UK United Kingdom   UNDP  United Nations Development Programme   UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme   UNESCO  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation   UNICEF  United Nations Children’s Fund   UNOSAT  UNITAR's Operational Satellite Applications Programme   US United States   VAT  Value -added tax     
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  8  LIST OF FIGURES   Figure 1:  Components of current AI systems 14  Figure 2:  Sectoral adopti on of AI technologies  21  Figure 3 : Global data centre energy demand by data centre type, 2010 -2022 31  Figure 4 : Power consumption of data centre s in the EU  32 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       9 PE 662.906  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   Background  and goal of the study   The European Green Deal pursues ambitious environmental  goals which  require a green  transformation of many sectors of society.  The tran sformative potential  of Artificial Intelligence (AI)  to  contribute to the achievement of the goals  of a green transition have been  increasingly and  prominently highlighted. At the same tim e, digital technologies such as AI  considerabl y increase  energy and resource consumption  and create risks of adverse environmental effects . This ambiguous  picture illustrates that political and regulatory action is necessary to channel the potential of AI tow ards  the goals of the European Green Deal. Tailoring and implementing ef fective AI polic ies presuppose  a  solid understanding of the socio -technical mechanisms that may lead to desired or undesired  consequences of AI. This report  aims to contribute to the development of such an understanding.   Main findings   The report  illustrates the potential of AI to achieve a green transition in several fields of environmental  policy:   • A range of promising cross -cutting use cases  can be differentiated: AI and other technologi es   have enormous potential,  as they  enable and accelerate the analysis of large amounts of data  to increase our knowledge base, allowing  us to better  understand  and tackle  environmental  challenges . The combina tion of Earth observation  data with AI offers more effective, efficient  and timely monitoring of environmental impacts and trends, bring s new insights in the  understanding of driving forces and environmental impacts and strengthens  predictive  capabilities.  Thus, AI will produce information relevant for environmental planning, decision making, management and monitoring of progress of environmental policies.  AI-generated  information could also help consumers as well as businesses to  adapt towards more  sustain able behaviour . Automated steering mechanisms and technologies enabling  predictive  maintenance will increasingly optimis e a safe operation of infrastructure s.   • Potential  of AI can also be identified for  various important sectors of a green transformation.  AI  applied to monitor and optimi se energy consumption can support the integration of  renewable energies in the electricity grids  and has the potential to support key priorities of the  Green Deal in the buildings sector . Applications in agriculture may allo w for more efficient use  of water, pesticides and fertili sers and thus could mitigate environmental impacts. The same is,  in principle, true for the tra nsport  sector: AI -based methods are already used for improved  planning of transport systems and infrastr ucture , to increase engine efficiency, o pt im ise  charging of electric vehicles, for the coordination of different transport modes  or the control   and management of railway  systems . Use cases of AI also include opportunities to strengthen  the circular economy, i.e. by making eco -design more effective or by assisting in the inspection,  sorting, separation and disassembling process to circulate materials in the economy. The  illustrated use  cases  exhibit  AI applications  to support  adaptation t o climate change  and to  fight pollution, as well as tools helping to preserve  biodiversity  and foster  nature conservati on.   On the flipside of these p romising use  cases , however, adverse impacts of AI must  be considered :  • Direct negative environmental effects of AI result from the use of digital hardware and  infrastructures such as data cent res and networks . This  lead s directly to the increas ed  consumption of material  resources and energy.  It is currently not possible to determine the  proportion of ener gy consumption caused by the operation of AI in digital hardware , data 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  10  centres and networks . Given the increasing relevance of AI  technologies  and the ir heavy use of  data, their contribution  to the energy consumption of information and communicati on  techno logies ( ICT) is likely to rise significantly . Data  traffic in  digital networks and other ICT  consume about 7% of the world's electricity today, and the share is projected to increase to  13% by 2030. It has been estimated that 5- 9% of the world’s total elec tricity use is caused by  ICT, which may rise to 20% in 2030.  Greenhouse gas emissions  (GHG)  from global data centres   and communications networks are estimated  at 1.1 to 1.3 Gt CO 2eq in 2020. The future  contribution of AI to GHG emissions will depend on the  energy efficiency of data centres and  their operation with renewable energies . Furthermore , it is crucial  to make energy and resource  efficiency a dedicated development goal in the AI innovation process .   • Systemic  effects, e.g. rebound effects, evolve  as consequences of  intended or unintended  changes in the behaviour of consumers, users or producers . Such effects can be the  consequence of opaque dynamics of AI system learning  and may be unintended  and even run  contrary to an intended  environmental ly friendly  function  of an application . For example,  products designed to automatically manage and implement more efficient energy  consumption may actually have the effect of causing users to give up control over their energy  consumption and over -consume.  The assessment of such effects can be challenging. However,  recent studies  prove that an  assessment is , in principle,  possible. A better understanding of the  pathways and  dynamics  by which input is processed in  AI-based decisions  might  help to t a ilor   adequate  regulatory measures. Environmental policy and research should therefore foc us on  further assessing the systemic  effects of AI.  Other adverse environmental impacts result from  AI applications that , as a consequence of their intended employment , contribute to GHG  emissions and nature destruction, e.g. the use of AI to unlock oil and gas deposits and to  explore and develop new territories for fossil fuel extraction.   • The recent proposal for a European ‘Artificial Intelligence Act’ ( European Commission 2021c )  supports an EU internal market for secure trustworthy and ethical A I systems  and establi shes a  governance system and enforcement r elated to fundamental rights and safety . The regulation  will establish a list of prohibited AI and specific rules for AI syste ms with high risks to heal th,  safety or adverse impacts on fundamental rights. However, these risks  do not include any  hazards  related to the environment  unless adverse environmental impacts pose a direct threat   to human rights or interests . Rules in relation to data and data governance, transparenc y,  human oversight and security  do not yet provide a  governance system that will avoid adverse  environmental impacts . As a  key recommendation, the report suggests further research and  development of methods and institutional procedures for assessing and controlli ng  environmental risks caused by AI.     • The EU strategies and policies related to AI already put a strong focus on the objectives of the  European Green Deal , in particular the European data strategy with its plans for a specific  ‘Common Europe Green Deal Data Space’ and the initiative ‘GreenData4All’ . The targeted  programmes, in particular the Digital Europe Programme (DEP), the Connecting Europe Facility  (CEF2), Horizon Europe and the Space Programme  aim at boosting investments in AI research,  innovation and adoption with a target of annual €20 billion in AI -related investment from the  public and private sector after 2020.   • Without proper  steering, there is the risk that AI -based research with potentia l to contribute to  a green transition  may not be prioritis ed if their expected economic benefit  is not high. It is  important that EU research program mes provide resources for potential AI applications in  environmental areas . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       11 PE 662.906  • The analysis of Member States ’ AI strategies showed that only six Member States have included  a strong focus on AI applications for the Green Deal objectives.  Despite the efforts of the EU’s  coordinated plan on AI, the analysis indicate s that further coordination with and between  Member  States’ strategies is still needed  to achieve the required impacts.   • Most of the international initiatives around AI do not sufficiently consider the environmental  dimension of sustainable development  and the EU could fill this gap .     
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  12  1. INTRODUCTION   1.1. The research  questio n: the role of AI in the European Green Deal   This study assesses the  potential  role of AI systems  with respect to the European Green Deal (EGD). The  EGD intends to promote fairness and prosperity and  an efficient, competitive,  and more sustainable  economy for Europ e. With respect to the environment, it targets no net greenhouse gas emissions by  2050, decoupling economic growth from resource use, preserving , and enhancing the EU ’s natural  capital and protecting people ’s health and well- being from environmental risks and impacts. The EGD  thus aims  for a  fundamental societal and economic transformation, which  will have implications in all  spheres of our societ ies and personal lives.   AI systems are increasingly permeating many aspects of our lives . A growing variety of data -driven,  connected,  and automated  applications support  us every day to navigate  or communicate,  to pu rchase   goods or gather information. But AI is not only increasingly ubiquitous in our private quotidian  routines: The technology ’s potential  to raise our knowledge, to manage processes more efficiently and  thus to control and shape our environment is already bei ng exploited  today in all sectors  of the  economy , in science and policy making .   Addressing the relationship between the desired green transition of the EGD and the de facto  transformation propelled through AI is urgent . The technology ’s potential for the environment is  frequently highlighted: With applications in  areas  such as  energy, agriculture,  housing  or mobility, AI  can potentially help to reduce energy and resource consumption,  support decarbonisation and   advance the circular econo my. AI could significa ntly speed up and improve  environmental  research  to  advance ground -breaking applications, e.g. in the energy or the mobility sectors. AI  may  also  improve  regulatory or political decision -making  by means of  the collection, analysis,  and processing of vast  amounts of  data  and  help with  the identification of complex patterns  in the environment or soci al  interactions .   However, just  as AI can work as a powerful lever  to achieve the goals of  a green transition,  it might also   amplify  detr imental dynamics  and  create new environmental risks . AI systems strongly drive the energy  and resource requirements of digitalisation through  their  energy -intensive algorithms and  the  intensive use of existing and newly developed  information  and  com municat ion technology ( ICT)  devices and ICT infrastructure (i.e.  data  centres  and data networks).   KEY FINDINGS   Many examples illustrate the potential of AI systems and applications to promote the goals of the  European Green Deal. However, there is also growing evidence of direct and indirect adverse  impacts on the environment.   The use of AI as a catalyst for a green transformation requires intelligent political stewardship.  Environmental policy and regulation should, first of all, focus on building better regulatory insight.  This means creating knowledge in order to leverage technological potential in a well -target ed  manner and developing procedures and methods to assess and mitigate environmental risks.  Targeted funding for research and development is also required because it is unlikely that AI  applications to support government activities related to monitoring, p lanning or infrastructures c an  be developed without public funding.  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       13 PE 662.906  As an issue of environmental policy , this Janus -faced nature of AI  and the importance of r egula t ion  can   be well grasped by looking at its basic  functionalit y: In a nutshell, AI system s are machine -based  system s that can make  predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual  environments for a set of objectives  (OECD 2021) . By ensuring that these  goals are implemented , AI  systems fulfil a reg ulat ory function  (see Lessig, 2000) . The “unprecedented capacity” of  AI (K ö nig 2020)   to reali se specific objectives explains its importance for environmental protection and sustainable  development  policies : In view of the large number of decisions that are shaped or  automatically  made   by AI systems every day and in innumerable social contexts,  the question of whether these systems  consider sustainability  goals is central . The question of whether  AI will deliver a toolbox  for a  sustainable future  or rather f unction  to accelerate  social and ecological problems  may thus be decided  to a large extent by whether it can be governed effectively  in pursuit of  sustainability  goals.  The EU has   recogni sed this political task and taken steps to  address  important strategi c and regulatory issues1. It  intends to explore measures to ensure that digital technologies, including  AI, can accelerate and  maximi se the impact of measures to address climate change and protect the environment. At the same  time, it highlights the need for the digital sector in Europe itself to focus on sustainability.   1.2. Analytical Approach   A green AI policy can be understood as the endeavour to “ regulate (autonomously) regulating  systems” along socio- ecological objectives . From an environmental policy perspective, unlocking  the potential of AI for the green transition requires answering two interrelated questions:  First, what   are the effects of  an increased use of  AI systems on the natural environment  and developments such  as anthropogenic climate change ? We thus need to understand how AI systems define the goals and  functions they implement. Second, what  are effective  pathways  for regulation and governanc e  to  manage the  dynamics  related to  AI in implement ing environmental objectives ?   In approach ing these two questions, we first describe and structure the potential  of AI to support the  goals of the European Green Deal, ranging from  the cross -cutting functionalities and potential of  AI for   environmental policy objectives  to concrete use  cases. We then go on to describe potential negative  environmental impacts of the development and use of  AI and subsequently identify  approaches for   their  mitigat ion. Given the policy focus of the analysis, a n overview of planned or already implemented  instruments to lever sustainability potential of AI and mitigate environmental risks is provided . B uilding  on the previous work steps, we formulate a set of policy recommendations.    1.3. Conceptual iss ues  There is no universally recognised definition of AI. The term AI refers not to one single technology but  comprises a set of diverse approaches, methods and technologies, which to different degrees and in  different ways show intelligent behaviour in various contexts.  According to the recent  proposal for  an  European ‘Artificial Intelligence Act’ , AI systems refer to  “software  that  […] can, for a given set of  human -defined objectives, generate outputs such as content, predictions, recommendations, or decisions  influencing the environments  they interact with”2. As stated in the proposal “ AI systems can be designed to  operate with varying levels of autonomy  and be used on a stand -alone basis or as a component of a product,                                                                 1  The European Commission has published a White Paper on “Artificial Intelligence: a European approach to excellence and trust”  (COM(2020) 65 final) aiming to foster a European ecosystem of excellence and trust in AI and a report on “The safety and liab ility   implications of Artificial Intelligence,  the Internet of Things and robotics” (COM/2020/64 final).   2  The  EU Artificial Intelligence Act  further defines the technologies and approaches used to develop AI systems. These are machine learni ng  approaches including deep learning, logic - and knowledge -based approaches and statistical approaches, Bayesian estimation, search  and optimization methods . See Article 3 para. 1 of t he Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Laying  down harmonized rules on Artificial Intelligence  (Artificial Intelligence Act), COM  (2021) 206 final , 21.4.2021.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  14  irrespective of whether the system is physically integrated into the product (embedded) or serve the  functionality of the product without being integrated therein (non- embedded) ” (European Commission  2021c ).   “Artificial intelligence” as such must be differentiated from the individual technologies that can be used  to implement AI  (Christen et al. 2020) . A prominent example of such a basic  or “general purpose  technology ” (Jovanovic and Rousseau 2005 ) for AI  is machine learning. These AI techn ologies  serve  to  realise  a number of basic functions such as pattern recognition, prediction of behaviour, or synthes es  such as the creation of  speech  (see Figure 1). AI applications  refer to specific use cases of  AI functions.   The term ‘ AI system ’ means a structured, context -bound combination of AI technologies  and  approaches  for the purpose of achie ving artificial intelligence .  Human decisions  according to Christen et al. (2020) are crucial for the formation of the goals of  algorithmic systems in three respects:  First, human design decisions are involved in combining AI  tech niques  into an AI system. Secondly, a human makes a strategic decision to use the AI system in a  particular context (e.g. instead of a human decision maker). Thirdly, the ‘ tactical level’  determines  when   and in what way human decisions may shape or control  the results of AI decisions. This may  occur  through the involvement of humans in the decision- making process itself; for example in the sense  that AI generates suggestions from which the human chooses and in this manner  gives feedback on  the basis of whic h the system can adapt (human in the loop; i.e. the systems have a function as deci si on  support), or in that the human observes the system to a certain extent and has a veto function (human  on the loop ) (see Christen et al., 2020).   Figure 1:  Components of current AI systems     Source:  Christen et al., 2020.  Own translation . Selection of applications adapted to focus on examples with environmental  relevance.   ‘AI decisions ’ thus are conclusions of AI systems with real -world implications that depend on human  decisions at the level of system design  (e.g. on which kind of (data -)input shall be  used for the system  and which AI technologies are combined) , the strategic level (decision on d eployment of the system)  and the tactical level (shaping the interaction with the person using the system  – e.g. by feedback to  decision support systems ) (Christen et  al. 2020).   
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       15 PE 662.906  This analysis focus ses on concrete applications of AI and their environmental impact . A systemati c  assessment of the technical and design implications of the respective AI systems is not feasible in the  given context . With respect to the notion of environmental effects of AI, we rely on an established  concept for the environmental a ssessment of ICT  systems (Liu et.al. 2019)  and differentiate, where  necessary, between  first, second and third order environmental effects:    • Direct effects  or first -order effects  occur along the lifecycle, i.e. the production, distribution,  use and disposal or recycling of ICT products, such as mobile devices, network infrastructures   or data  centres .  • Indirect effects or second -order effects  refer to all those changes in resource use and  environmental consumption that result from the use of ICT in various application areas.  One  example of this would be the use of AI systems to make a production flow in industrial  manufacturing more energy efficient.    • Systemic effects or third -order effects  arise from the complex interactions between digital  technolo gies and fundamental societal structures and relationships, such as lifestyles,  organi sation and forms of work, the energy system, consumption and production patterns,  social participation opportunities, and many more.      
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  16  2. OVERVIEW OF THE MAIN  ASPECTS OF AI AND T HE EU GREEN  DEAL   2.1. The potential role of AI in enhancing the capacities to understand  and tackle environmental challenges – cross -cutting issues   Developments in the field of AI are highly  dynamic , with new and innova tive use cases a r is ing  on a  frequent basis. Economic actors remain  the main drivers in the development of AI applications  and  comparatively few AI -based solutions  currently aim to  solve environmental  challenges.  However , there  is an increasing number of such applications , which are intended , inter alia , to monitor environmental  damage , increase resource efficiency  and improve our  understanding of the environment and climate .  Research on the potential of AI to foster a  green and sustainable transformation is also increasing . The  following chapters will take a closer look at the  most prominent (current) use cases  of AI  applications  for environmental purposes .   2.1.1.  Better information for relevant decision -making   Enhanced scientific knowledge on the environment is a key condition for understanding and tackl i ng  environmental challenges. Farley et al.  (2018)  differentiate between five types of data streams in this  context: (a) the contin uous  delivery of data by remot e sensors on Earth observing systems; (b) the  aggregation of individual scientific observations and experiments into larger curated community data  resources (e.g. Global Biodiversity Information Facility); (c) investment in long -term ecological  monitoring networks at national to continental scales (e.g. LTER, NEON; INSPIRE); (d) the deployment  of automated and inexpensive sensor networks (e.g. phenology cameras, wildlife camera traps, and  temperature loggers) and, lastly, (e) data captured by citizens.  AI technologies can play a role in  all five  data streams.   The following section take a closer look  at the role of AI in earth observation  (EO) , as this  offers   important new insights into many environmental problems . The EU’s EO programmes such as  Copernicus  and New Space  produce large amounts of environmental data and provide many  opportunities for AI systems, such as  a more effective, efficient and timely monitoring of  environmental impacts and trends , identif ication  of patterns in available data to bring  new insight s  in the understanding  of driving forces  and environmental impacts  and strengthen ing predictive  capabilities  related to complex interactions  in the geo - and biosphere.  Thus , the combination of AI  and EO can produce information relevant for environmental plann ing, decision -making , management   and monitoring of progress  of environmental policies.   There is a wealth of examples from research projects which combine different AI techniques  with  EO   data. The Digi tal Twin of Planet Earth project combines digital infrastructure with EO data and AI enabled applications to build models  of the Earth to provide an accurate representation of the past,  current and future changes3. The digital twin Earth is meant to visualis e, monitor and forecast human  activities on the planet and to support policy priorities on environmental issues, e.g. climate change,  environment al degradation,  or urban isation . The project B igEarthNet is using n eural networks for land  cover classification from Sentinel -24 imagery which is essential for monitoring purposes in agriculture  and forestry  (Sumbul et al . 2019) . In the ExtremeEarth project deep learning is used to predict extreme                                                                3  Further information on the Digital Twin of Planet Earth project can be found on the website of the European Space Agency. Ava ilable at:   https://www.esa.int/ESA_Multimedia/Images/2020/09 /Digital_Twin_Earth .  4  Sentinel -2 is a Copernicus  Earth observation mission acquiring high spatial resolution images over land and coastal waters.  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       17 PE 662.906  natural events such as f loods, droughts  or storms and to provide concrete tools such as  water  availability maps for selected agricultural areas for field level irrigation support  (Kou barakis 2019) .  Several research teams are working on methods that combine AI and EO data to detec t clusters of  macroplastics in oceans to support plastic waste clean -up projects  (Biermann et al. 2020) . As part of the  global initiative ‘AI for good’, Microsoft started the initiative ‘AI for Earth’  (AI for Earth 2021) . The  initiative provides open -sourc e tools, models, infrastructures and data related to land cover mapping,  species classification, camera trap image processing  and geospa tial datasets and nature conservati on  data . The intersection of AI and EO  is a key area of AI application s for visual diagnostics  and an emerging  field for deep learning.  A future step could be a hybrid modelling approach, coupling physical process  models with the data -driven deep learning algorithms  (Rolnik 2019) . Recent research has produced  some web -based toolkits addr essing specific use cases, e .g. UN Global Pulse developed in cooperation  with UNOSAT  a web -based toolkit  for UN agencies  that helps to monitor fire s, flood assessment or the  impacts of cyclones.   Using AI techniques in EO requires significant additional work for data preparation , the  integration of physical principles into algorithms , the  ground truthing of data  to validate  products and for the development of data sets to train  AI algorithms , which is comple x and timeconsuming for EO parameters . Currentl y, the lack of training data sets for EO applications is a limiting  factor  in AI applications  and the potential of AI in EO is considered largely untapped (ESA 2018) . Wh ile  AI is frequently applied to analyse optical images , mu ltispectral optical sensors used by satellites or  data from radar or laser sensors require further work for the development of deep learning an d related  analytic techniques . The initiative ‘ AI4EO ’ was started by  the Φ-lab of ESA’s Directorate of Earth  Observation Programmes  with the aim of bringing together  the AI and EO communities  (AI4EO  2021) .  A first  challenge organi sed by the initiative aims at developing AI -powered solutions to facilitate the  downscaling of analyses and forecasts of surface concentrations of particulat e matter (PM2.5) and  nitrogen dioxide (NO 2). The TELEIOS5 infrastructure  designs and implements  a virtual observatory  infrastructure for EO data  (Koubarakis 2020) .The activities  of the European Commission  in this area are  summari sed in S ection 3.1.  AI can help accelerate the process of  scientific discovery  and experimentation , e.g. by learning from  past experiments to suggest  future experiments that are mor e likely to be successful  (Donti  2020) . Examples in this area are  AI applications  promot ing the development of technologies such as  batteries or solar panels  or support ing the development of new sustainable materials through AI  enhanced shorter testing cycles and periods.  AI can also help accelerate computationally intensi ve  simulations and link those simulations with real -time data , which will also speed up planning processes.   In the social sciences, social media data is already used  for research purpos es, avoid ing reliance on  lengthy interviews . In plant science, the area of phenomics com bines  AI, big data on plant phenotypes ,  genetic information , and environmental information to enable  gene mining for favourable agronomi c   traits for faster crop improvement  (Zhao et al. 2019) .   2.1.2.  AI applications to inform and encourage responsible business behaviour   Businesses have an  impact  on the environment  both through their own operations as well as through  their supply and value  chains. AI can help businesses develop  more sustainable business models.   Firstly, they can  provid e better information on how to reorient economic decision -making to w ard   sustainability : E.g., i nquiries of AI applications in financial technology (“Fintech”) diagnose a range of                                                                5  TELEIOS is a recent European project allowing scalable access to petabytes of Earth Observation data and eﬀective knowledge discovery.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  18  potential to better align financing decisions with sustainable development. A UNEP report analyses  how technologies like machine learning could lead to “ revolutionary innovations for building trust,  transparency and traceability for financial transactions and make tomorrow’s financial system far more  efficient in mobilizing green finance ”. For example, Fintech is supposed to be able to disrupt the  provision of financial protection, risk management, risk transfer and risk diversification for vulnerable  and e xposed communities, real economy assets and infrastructures, and nature’s ecosystems (Castilla Rubio et al. 2016).   AI applications can improve resource , energy and material efficiency . AI solutions in this field build  upon  Industry 4 .0, i.e. the automation  of manufacturing and industrial practices  via the use of smart  technology . Technologies such as m achine -to-machine communication (M2M) and the internet of  things (IoT) are linked to mechanical and electronic devices (production machines, industrial robots ,  etc.) and integrated for increased automation, improved communication,  and self -monitoring . The  creation of such a cyber -physical system leads to vast amounts of data which can be used, inter alia , to  analyse and further improve processes or develop new products and  business models. AI helps to  unlock this potential via  predictive analytics, intelligent assistance systems, robotics, intelligent  automation,  and intelligent sensors . Although Industry 4.0 solutions are usually developed and  implemented t o achieve cost reductions or other financial benefits, environmental opportunities arise  when the use of resources , energy,  and materials (i.e. waste)  is effectively reduced (Seifert et al. 2018) .  Adverse environmental impacts occur to a large extent withi n businesses’ supply and value chains ,  e.g. in the context of  sourcing minerals , the manufacturing of products  or the disposal and recycling  of  waste.  At the same time, more and more data sets are  generated  for each step  along the value chai n.   As outlined above, businesses today are heavily instrumented with sensors, trackers, and other smart  devices collecting data in real time. If  AI-supported Industry 4.0 solutions are being used to further  the integration of data along the value chain , they c an allow for the tracking and monitori ng of  components and materials across their entire life cycle – a prerequisite for realising the transiti on  towards a circular economy , among other things  (Wilts and  Berg  2017) .  AI applications can also help businesses  in selecting and monitoring their suppliers by more efficiently  compiling and analysing unstructured data such as news entries, audit reports or social media posti ngs.   Moreover, AI solutions used by purchasing  compan ies can indirectly benefit environmenta l  performance among suppliers. For example, near real -time tracking of inventory as well as pu r ch a sing  patterns allows for very accurate demand forecasts. Accurate forecasts in turn avoid short -time  changes to orders, which may require air shipping, cancel lation of orders or overstocking, both of  which may result in the destruction of goods  (Sanders 2019) .  2.1.3.  AI applications to inform and encourage responsible consumer behaviour   Information on where and how products were manufactured  is considered critical in raising consumer  awareness. AI can  make such information readily available. For example, researchers  in Germany  are  develop ing a ‘Green Consumption Assistant ’, intended to facilitate sustainable consumption by  providing information about sustainable alt ernatives when buying  or searching for products o n line .  The assistance system would  inform  on manufacturing conditions and  energy usage, among other  things  (ZUG 2021) .  In addition, AI systems could incentivis e or ‘nudge’  consumers towards more sustainable co n su mption .  Nudging has received widespread attention as an environmental policy instrument in the last years   (Carlsson 2019) . Combined with theories on human behaviour, partially automated (real -t im e) a n alysis   of large amounts of data from various source s could help reduce ecologically harmful perceptual or  behavioural structures and enable environmentally  friendly purchase decisions (Michalek  et al. 2015) . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       19 PE 662.906  Successful  AI assi sted  nudging has been observed  in the  hotel industry . Virtual assistant and robot s  were deployed as nudging agents to influence behavio ur among hotel guests in relation to energy,  water and towel use  (Tussyadiah et al. 2019) . The ethical implications of nudging as a “ subtle subversion   of free will ” (Thapa 2019) , however should always be considered.   2.1.4.  Steering and maintaining technological systems, infrastructure or hazardous  facilities   By means of enhance d sensory systems  and automated data  analysis , AI systems can enable a  much   faster and much more efficient management of technological systems and critical infrastructure. As an  illustration for the promise of AI  systems to anticipate and regulate complex interactions between  social subsystems and natural dynamics, Thapa (2019) cites the example of the German applied  research project WindNODE, “ which uses data analytics to increase the overall efficiency of renewable  energy production by managing energy consumption. The system includes forecasts to predict the electricity  generation of solar panel s and wind turbines , which are coordinated with flexible energy consumers such as  production lines that can run at different times or with commercial refrigerators that can be turned off for a  few hours during times of low electricity production without significant  temperature increases .” In the EUfunded research project FUDIPO6, for example, control algorithms were developed to improve the  performance of a biological wastewater treatment plant, measuring the quality of incoming waste,  and  lowering the aer ation demand. The latter reportedly constitutes about 50% of a wastewater treatment  plant’s electric energy consumption (FUDIPO 2021).   AI can also play an important role as part of a predictive maintenance system, e.g. in the safety  management of hazardous  plants.  Improved defect  detection based on  prediction outcomes could   help to avoid disastrous failures. In industrial production, ma chine learning applications, accordi ng to   Çınar  et al . (2020) , provide several  advantages, which include repair stop  reduction, spare -par t life  increases, repair verification, an d increase in overall profit . Specifically , the possibility to increase the  remaining useful lifetime of industrial equipment might have notable positive environmental effects.  However, the poten tial of predictive maintenance depend s on the objectives and use  context of the  system : E.g., there can be conflicting objectives between reducing cost and reducing environmental  impact  (Carlson et  al. 2020) .  2.1.5.  AI applications to strengthen environmental administration and participato ry  governance   AI is playing a n increasing role in the development and application of regulatory technology  – so-ca lled  ‘RegTech ’, a concept which originated from the field of financial regulation . RegTech, acco rding to  Deather age (2021) , is simply the extrapolation of the ideas around automating compliance and  providing insight.  In general, all the functions of AI  expl ained in Figure 1 above  may  be applied for the  purpose of more effective and efficient environmental regulation  (Deatherage 2021) .  AI can play an important role in supporting the implementation and enforcement of EU  (environmental) law  both by aiding effective action and by automating administrative decisions   (Couldry and  Powell 2014) . A specific area where AI applications have already been developed for  compliance purposes is crop compliance. Crop compliance maps are generated to track  the  implementation of measures under the EU Common Agricultural Policy for Romania (Robles 2020).  The                                                                6  FUDIPO, Future Directions of Production Planning and Optimized Energy – and Process Industries, is a project funded by the European   Commis sion under the H2020 programme, SPIRE -02-2016 topic: “Plant -wide monitoring and control of data -intensive processes”.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  20  adoption of ‘ smart meters ’ for polluting enterpri ses can measure and report real -time emissions data  and support the enforcement of emission limits (Amas heva 2019) .  AI could  further play a role in monitoring  specific offences , where  conventional methods of monitori ng  prove too laborious  (Purdy 2010) . As an  example, a predictive AI software named Protection Assistant  for Wildlife Security (PAWS) has been developed to combat poaching. It integrates machine learning  and game theory to  predict poachers’ behaviour. PAWS  then  suggests patrol routes  based on the  poachers’ behaviour model  (Fang et al. 2017) . In this context, other AI solutions have also been  developed to detect listing of wildlife for sale on major e- commerce platforms  (Rusch and  Arora  2021 ).   In the finance sector, AI is already advertised as a too l for fraud detection . Emissions trading systems  such as the EU ETS have risks related to fraud, e.g. the experienced VAT fraud, unauthorised access to  accounts in the registry through phishing attacks, identity fraud and risks of money laundering. Any AI  supported applications  for fraud detection developed for the finance sector could therefore also  benefit complex emission trading systems. The detection of fraudulent ecolabels and product  declarations  may also be improved with AI. Such use would require t hat third party certified  environmental labelling programmes start using AI in their procedures for tracking labelled products.    Digital modelling of policy options can help in m aking more effective governmental  decisions , s u ch   as in the context of urban g overnance and planning . As an example, Imec and the Netherlands  Organization for Applied Scientific Research  (TNO ) launched the ‘digital twin’ of the city of Antwerp  in   2018. The digital 3D replica of the city combines noise pollution data with real -time s ensor informati on  from air quality and traffic, as well as computer models. Its aim is to prov ide an up -to-date and  predictive view of the city in which the impact of planned government measures can be simulated and  tested  (Imec 2018) . As another example for potential of AI in urban governance, sensors with integrated  AI systems are being used to anonymously identify different types of road users at selected junctions  and control traffic signals to allow different modes of transportation  to be prioritised as and when  required. With more cyclists on the road as people avoid public transport due to  COVID -19, these ‘smart  junctions’ will be able to give priority to people on foot or bike where and when appropriate (Vivacity  Labs 2020). AI  could provide a variety of solutions to urban planning and governance problem s , like  the search for optimal future land use and transpo rtation  (Wu and  Silva 2010;  Wang et al 2020) .   Finally, AI  applications  could offer  new potential to better involve citizen s in planning decisions. For  example , the  IBM technology ‘project debater ’ will be able to meaningfully engage in a live debate with  a human, absorb massive and diverse sets of information and perspectives and help people build  persuasive arguments and make well -informed decisions. The  technolog y is supposed to help in  dealing with polls or surveys by  sort ing out complex and controversial issues, support ing the weighing  of different positions and thus enabl ing well-informed decision -making  (Curioni 2019) . Municipalities  want ing to create more green spaces could for example ask their citizens to participate in a survey in  everyday language. AI systems could synthe sise millions of responses and identify  the most im portant  points of view  and their weighting  (Schmidt 2021) . AI-supported qualitative text analysis tools (e.g.  NVivo or ATLAS.ti) are regularly used to structure and summarise contributions in public consultation  processes with a large number of stakeholders (e.g. AI was  used in processing the more than 16,000  subm issions received in the EU’s public consultation process on its common agriculture policy).  Given   the paramount importance of participation, acceptance and policy communication, especially for  green transformation approaches, such applications could play an important role in the context of the  EGD.   
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       21 PE 662.906  2.2. Potential of AI to help reach  carbon neutrality and reduc e energy  consumption and negative impacts of human activities: sector specific applications   2.2.1.  Overarching trends   AI already plays a significant role in the context of the EGD. Surveys related to the current and planned  use of AI technologies in the EU indicate that sectors with key relevance for the EGD figure prominently  among those that already use at least one or two AI technologies or plan to use AI technologies  (see  Figure 2 ).   Figure 2: Sectoral adoption of AI technologies     Source:  European Commission 2020 .  PwC and Microsoft quantified the impact of AI on global GHG emissions  and found it to po t en t ially   contribute a reduction of 1.5 – 4% in 2030 or 0.9 – 2.4 Gt CO 2e relative to a Business as Usual  (BAU)  scenario (Gilham 2020). However, no details are provided  regarding this scenario, apart from the fact   that  it being a mix of three different BAU scenarios by different organisations . It is stated that some or  all of the AI effects considered could already be part of the baseline assumptions on carbon intensity  changes . This means that there could be lower or e ven no  additional effects relative to the BAU scenario  which al ready assumes efficiency and optimi sation improvement s. The paper  generally  lacks  transparency regarding its  methods , assumptions and  the specific AI applications  considered . It is  therefore no t possible to confirm the estimates provided.  The effects quantified as AI effects  are often  very indirect effects of AI, e.g. it is assumed that AI leads to a considerable price decrease in renewable  energies , which has a strong mitigati ng impact. However, this  price reduction for renewable energies   is already a clear trend without AI  and should not be accounted as an AI impact . The Boston Consul ti ng  Group ( BCG) published an even higher estimate of a GHG emission reduction between 2.6 and 5 .3 Gt  CO 2e in 2030 but did not provide any methodologies or assumptions on how this estimate w as  produced  (Degot et al. 2021) . In addition, the estimate  was  published in an advertising context for the  company  and may not withstand  scientific s crutiny .   
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  22  2.2.2.  AI solutions in the energy sector, in particular in the building s sector    a. AI solutions in the buildings sector   AI is receiving increasing attention for supporting the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the  buildings sector , where the various applicat ions can be classified in two main categories:  1)  applications  addressing energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions  in the use phase of  the building , and 2) application s addressing the construction phase  of the building.   Both categories  address key priorities of  the different initiatives under the E GD: With the buildings  sector being responsible  for about 40% of energy consumption and about 36% of CO 2 emissions  in  the  EU (European Commission  2020e ), addressing the energy use of buildings is a key  priority in order to  meet the EU targets for greenhouse gas  emissions as well as the targets set under the Energy Efficiency  Directive. Furthermore, the Renovation Wave Communication  sets the target of doubling the  renovation rate and promotes l ife cycle thinking and circularity , where applications of AI in the  construction sector may provide new opportunities.   Within the first category, AI  can contribute to energy saving by  facilitating energy  profiling  and demand  estimation as  well as  assisting in  appliance profiling  and fault detection  (Djenouri et al. 2019) . Several  contributions  have confirmed  that it is possible to utilise AI for detecting anomalous energy  consumption behavio urs either generated by end  users, appliance failures, or other causes (Himeur et  al. 2021) . While artificial neural networks  have been broadly utili sed for building energy estimation and  are the most commonly used technique in this area  (Seyedzadeh et al. 2018) , the application of AI in   monitoring and optimi sing energy consumption in buildings also includes other techniques such as   the Classification and Regression Tree (CART), the Support Vector Machine (SVM), the Linear Regression  (LR), the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), and the seasonal autoregressive  integrated moving average (SARIMA) methods (Chou and Tran 2018) .   Within the second category , AI has the potential to increase productivity in the construction sector   (Darko et al. 2020) , support  resource efficiency and  the reduction of waste in construction  (A li et  a l.  2019)  and  increase energy effici ency  (Kim et al. 2011; Mehmood et al. 2019) .  Given  the considerable efforts needed to meet the objective of  doubl ing the renovation rate  o u tlined  in the Renovation Wave Communication , particularly  in view of  the labour shortage that is currentl y  observed in the retrofit market  (Kenkmann and Braungardt 2018) , AI technologies have the potential  to contribute to  meeting the challenge.  Furthermore, AI may contribute to reducing life -cycle  emissions in the buildings sector. H owever, while  AI is playing an  increasing role in the a rchitecture,   engineering  and  constructio n industr ies, its application to energy and  resource consumption is   currently still limited  (Darko et al. 2020) .  b. AI so lutions in the energy sector   i. Flexible integration  of renewable energies in future energy systems   Decar bonisation  will require switch ing to renewable  electricity production. This will lead to  considerably more  decentrali sed electricity producers, supply influenced by weather conditions and  daytime with the need for flexible generation and storage solutions.  Intelligent power grids (smart  grids) combine generation, storage and consumption. A central control system using AI optimal l y  coordinates between generation, storage and consumption  and thus balances out power fluctuati ons   – especially those caused by fl uctuating renewable energies i n the grid. AI is already used to control   grid networks, forecast supply and demand, and optimi se load management  and  is thus  indispensable in the future to achieve efficient use and integration of high shares of renewable 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       23 PE 662.906  energies. For example, th e company Veritone Energy provides customisable AI solutions to energy  utilities draw ing on weather forecast, energy demand, pricing and grid device data to automate the  forecasting processes in real  time  (Veritone 2021) . Siemens (2020) has included AI in its portfolio of  applications that build, operate and maintain smart grids and a large number of start -ups have started  developing AI solutions for smart grids.   ii. Optimi sing renewable energies   As in other sectors, AI technologies can  further optimi se renewable energy  production .  Reinforcement learning has for example been used to maximi se electricity production from movable  solar panels  (Abel et al. 2018)  or from wind turbines. It can  determine optimal placement of turbines in  wind farm s (Dilkina et al. 2015) . Machine condition monitoring systems are further being applied to  wind turbines, in particular in remote areas and offshore sites for fault detection, automatic faul t  identificat ion and prognosis of failure which enhances availability, production and reduc es  maintenance costs of wind farms  (Hastings 2020) . Other AI application s are able to detect faults in  rooftop solar panels.   iii. Methane leakage   AI can also help to predict methane l eakage from gas pipelines and compressor stations, detect  leaks and proactively suggest pipeline management . The company Bluefield provides independent  data using AI techniques and data from 23 satellites and provides CH 4 emission data for 120,000  companie s in 130 countries and helped to identify the origin of methane leaks in different sites in  Florida  (Bluefield 2021) .  2.2.3.  AI solutions in the transport sector   a. Improved planning of transport systems and infrastructure   AI applications can improve the data avai lable for the planning of transport systems and infrastructure.  The gathering of such data can be improved through AI in combination with satellite data for vehic l es   (Kaack et al. 2019)  and with automated analysis from cameras for pedestrians, cyclists or passengers in  public transport. Smart card data in public transport and mobile phone data also provide large  amounts of data,  which can be used in combination with AI for a better understanding of behaviour  of transport users or mobility patterns . Better d ata will allow improved modelling of transport  demand in the short and long term and a better planning of infrastructures and services . Improved  planning can reduce unnecessary travel distances, optimi se vehicle routing, advance  the combinati on  of differen t transport modes, and optimi se occupancy and loads. However, untapping  this po t ential  requires that planning authorities have access to AI -supported planning tools and the necessary data,   and that transport is planned in an integrated way.   b. Improving energy and resource efficiency   Energy consumption of vehicles depend s on many factors such as engine  efficiency , aerodynamics,  vehicle  weight and  tire resistance. AI can help in optimi sing the design of energy -efficient vehicles   by improving the aerodynami cs, power management or enhancing  engines or reduc ing resource  consumption. AI in this respect is not developing entirely new designs, but it can help improvi ng  existing designs based on criteria such as energy efficiency or resource use. Large brands such  as  BMW  or General Motors are already using AI in car design  (BMW 2021, Griffin 2021) . GreenSteam is a company  that provides software solutions for the marine industry to help reduce fuel use (Wolodozko 2021) . 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  24  c. Modal shift to lower -carb on options   To increase the usage of sustainable transport modes with lower carbon  emissions, it  is necessary to  understand transport mode choices. AI  systems  can be applied to improve mode choice mode lling  by analy sing data of passenger and freight transport  (Uddin 2021) . AI systems can improve the  coordination of different transport modes  with predictive models. Low -carbon transportati on  options can be made more a ttractive  to users through prediction of arrival times with automatic vehicle  location systems  (Jabamony & Shanmugavel 2020) .  d. Electrification of transport   Electric vehicles are essential for  decarboni sing transport , provided that countries shift to renewable  energies for electricity production. Research and development of efficient batteries integrate AI   analysis of operational data. AI  systems  can improve battery and charging management  (Rolnick et  al. 2019) . AI can also optimis e charging of vehicles in times of high electricity supply and allow using  car batteries as energy storage option for the grid. Machine learning has also been found more  powerful than other methods to improve real -time power management in hybrid vehicles  (Ali and  Söffker 2018) .  e. Operation of transport systems and t raffic guidance systems   For freight transport , freight consolidation (bundling of shipments) can reduce the number of  trips and improved routing can avoid trucks with empty loads . Shipment consolidation al so  enables the use of railways and waterways because these transport modes require larger loads t han  trucks. For logistics service providers, AI offers opportunities to optimi se the complex interactions  of shipment sizes, destinations and transport modes and improve supply chain efficiency .  Deutsche Post DHL group has for example developed real -time r outing algorithms for its fleet  operation and drivers  (Gesing et al. 2018) .  In the EU, a key step towards the introduction of AI solutions in rail transport is the deployment of the  European rail traffic management system (ERTMS),  which provides trains wit h a driver assistance  system. The ERTMS aims to harmonise EU rail transport systems by deploying a single control,  command, signalling and communication standard . The ERTMS will reduce rail energy  consumption,  increa se punctuality and line capacity and ens ure technical compatibility between  national rail systems. This can contribute to a  more attractive  European train network for  long  distances , which has the potential to replace flights and the ir associated  much higher emissions. AI  systems are also used t o improve the performance and competitiveness of rail freight. The EU Sh ift 2rail  initiative is carrying out activities to better synchronise container train movements on the netw ork,  improve real -time information and data exchange  (Shift2Rail 2021) .   In av iation , AI-based modelling of demand can improve operational efficiency to predict runway  demand and taxi ing time  to reduce excess ive fuel consumption through airport congestion . Such  a  tool for efficient runway scheduling (Spot and Runway Departure Advisor SARDA) has been developed  in a cooperation between  NASA and American Airlines which has been optimise d with machine  learning techniques  (Lee et al. 2015) .   AI systems  also help to keep  the traffic flowing via traffic signals , and traffic lights that rotate in real  time to meet on -the-ground traffic flow demands  and an improved flow will reduce emissions.   f. Shared mobility   In recent years, the options for app -based ride services, ride pooling and different forms of car sharing  have increased considerably. AI plays  an integral part in the optimisation  of such mobility  services . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       25 PE 662.906  AI systems are used for efficient rout e planning , prediction of travel times , improve ment of pick -up  point selection , optimisation  of fleets  (Tiiku 2021)  or scheduling of maintenance  (Ilichev 2018) .  However, the overall environmental impact of ride pooling is  uncertain . Data from a large survey  in eight big cities and California in the US showed that a pp-based ride services mostly competed with  environmentally -friendly transport modes and 60% of users would have otherwise  taken public  transport, walked, biked or would n ot have made the trip ( Schaller Consulting 2018) . The same source  reports that , on average , the ride pooling in these US cities added 160% of vehicle miles due to  r ides  without passengers before pick -up and after drop -off, longer routes for pooled services , or small rates  of pooling achieved . The environmental impacts look better for station -based car sharing options.  Results from the Netherlands showed that car sharers own 30% less cars than prior to car sharing, that  they drive 15% -20% fewer vehicle kilom etres and emit 13 -18% less emissions compared to car use with  own ed cars (Nijland & van Meerkerk 2017) . Reductions in car ownership, mileage and emissions are  also confirmed by several  studies in Germany  (Loose 2016)  and the  UK (Steer Davis Gleave 2017) .  However, free- floating car sharing did not reduce emissions in a study in several cities in Germany, not  even with electric cars  (Hülsmann et al. 2018) .  g. Automated vehicles and logistics   Around the globe, automotive manufacturers and technology firms are work ing on AI technologi es to  develop automated vehicles for road transport and fully automated vehicles are already being tested.  Automated driving could improve driving efficiency by 10 -20%  (Wadud et al. 2016) . At the same  time, the sensory technology en tails an additional energy demand  which according to Mohan et  al. (2020) will lead to a reduced range of electric vehicles of 10 -15% for city driving. Each fully  automated car will be generating around 4000 GB per day  (Miller 2017) . 1.7 million autonomous cars  (0.2% of global car fleet) would generate the same data volume as the present global internet  tr affic   (Liu et al. 2019) . The network technology and the data processing infrastructure behind these data  volumes will require large amounts of electricity and produce life-cycle emissions. Specific estimates  are currently  not available and will depend on the way the electricity will be produced.   In addition,  automated cars may offer new on -demand services which are likely to  increase  vehicle mileage because they will lead to additional empty trips for pick -up and drop -down  compared to personal driving . Automated cars may also induce transport demand from currentl y  underserved groups (e.g. elderly and driving -restricted groups ). Additional vehicle mileage will be  linked with higher emissions. Whether automated driving reduces congestion  may depend on the time  perspective. In the short term, e.g. after an accident, it is likely that congestion dissolves more quickly,  while in th e long  term congestion  will depend on the physical limits of the road infrastructure ( wh ich   cannot be changed by automation) and the number of vehicles . The long -term impact of fully  automated vehicles  on greenhouse gas  emissions  will depend on many factors such as the regulatory  framework , but it is not unlikely that emissions will increase given the considerations above. Wadud et  al. (2016) found many potential energy  reduction benefits through partial automation, but also m ajor   energy/emission risk s at full automation. Autonomous truck platooning – virtually linked trucks that  travel in tandem with small intervehicle distances -  in freight transport showed promising results and  reduced energy consumption up to 10% due to lower air resistance (Zhang et al. 2020) .  2.2.4.  AI solutions in the agricultural sector   AI applications in the agricultural sector mainly focus on intensive and industriali sed farming  systems . The required data for these applications is generated through remote sensing technologies  using satellites, planes and unmanned aerial vehicles  (drones) and through on the ground sensors in  combination with IoT technology. Especially the use of unmanned aerial vehicles has allowed scaling 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  26  up information collection, allowing the development of applications ranging from the  identification of water stress, monitoring of crop diseases  and  weed mapping to crop yield  prediction  (Jung et al. 2020) . AI techniques  currently used in agricultural applications mainly fall under  the machine learning category and include artificial neural networks (deep learning , e.g. convolutional  neural networks) and decision tree algorithms  (Jung et al. 2020) . AI al so underwrite s the development  of robotic applications in agriculture , for example for weeding and harves t.  a. Potential reduction of chemical inputs  and improved nutrient management   The most advanced use case of AI in the agricultural sector is precision agriculture, where AI  enabled  processing of data allows farmers to make temporally and spatially tailored management  decisions , leading to a more efficient use of agricultural inputs, such as fertili sers and  pesticides   (Finger et al. 2019) . For example, agricultural machines equipped with cameras can generate images of  plants in the field  and  deep learning -based image processing then allows for real time recognition of  weeds, followed by the precise application of herbicides by the machine. This application is being  developed  in response to herbicide resistant weeds and is expected to reduce herbicide use by 77%   per application  (Blue River Technology 2021) .   Machine learning is also enabling analysis of bacterial and fungal soil diversity  in combination with  soil chemistry data.  This allows for a faster analysis of the impact of different management  pr a ctices,  potentially giving farmers the choice between  pesticide s and  management alternatives such as   planting of cover crops  (Trace Genomics 2021) . Another example is the use of image recognition for  pest identification to prevent infestations  and implement integrated pest management  (Pla n t ix  2021b ). Plantix offers real time management advi ce to farmers who send images of their crops via  WhatsApp and receive responses from a chatb ot (Plantix 2021a ). This can improve early on detection  of infestations and is also an example of how AI, in this case natural language processing, can  support and improve farm advisory services .   AI analysis of hyperspectral imagery of plants in the field  allows to identify nitrogen and phosphorus  deficiencies to inform fertilis er application  (Cloud  Agronomics 2021)  and  optimi se soil nutrient  flows . Nutrient deficiencies in plants can  also be identified through photo s and image recognition   (Plantix 2021a) . These techniques provide information to farmers more quickly than  the traditional field  sampling and  laboratory analysis  (Feng et a l. 2020) .  Finger et al . (2019) conducted a literature review collecting a range of case studies that show potential  positive  impacts of precision agriculture. For example, for fuel consumption by agricultural  machines, literature shows a reduction between 6% and 25%. Values for reduction in pesticide  application (herbicides and insecticides) range from 11% to 90% (average 25%).  For N2O  emissions, they identified an example where nitrogen application at variable rates reduced  emissions by 34 %, and another example where an increased but variable nitrogen application did not  result in increased emissions. However, Finger et al. als o stress the high uncertainty around the  magnitude of positive effects and that figures known so far are case specific , i.e. they depend on  the analysed crop and surrounding environmental conditions.   b. Potential reduction of water consumption   AI is also used  to determine soil moisture and other relevant parameters that can guide farmers in  making more efficient use of irrigation water . This is achieved through combining satellite imagery  and information on precipitation volumes  (HelioPas AI 2021) . Optimis ing irrigation also depends on  accurate weather information , given that weather directly influences evapotranspiration. Thus, AI  applications to improve weather forecasting, even to the farm level,  have recently increased ( i.e. 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       27 PE 662.906  Roach 2019, Fasal 2021). Consid ering the potential impacts of  climate change -induced climate  variability, this use of AI could  support farmers in climate change adaptation  (see section 2.2.5) .  c. Pote ntial contribution to climate change mitigation   Agriculture is responsible for 10% of the EU’s GHG emissions (436 Mt CO 2eq). CH 4 from enteric  fermentation of sheep and cattle makes up 42% of agricultural emissions  and N2O emissions from   agricultural soils and manure management  make up 43%  (EEA 2020) . Precision agriculture  ca n  dir ectly   reduce  fuel consumption from agricultural machines  and  could potentially have positive second order  effects  for energy use. For example, a more efficient use of input s could  reduce the energy   consumption  required  for their production  (Böcker et al. 2019) . Also, if AI leads to a decrease in  anthropogenic nitrogen inputs (from mineral or organic fertilizers) into cropland and grassland, it c ould   help reduce direct and indirect N 2O emissions from agricultural soils  and nutrient runoff into water .  Currently, N2O emissions make up around 3.9% of total net EU GHG emissions in 2018 (EEA 2020)7. A  commonly reported effect of new technologies in agriculture is the increase of yields  (Lezoche et al.  2020)  and the potential to preserve soil health. If this leads to less pressure for expanding agricultural  area  or free s up crop - and gras sland  on organic soils , it could have a positive effect on emissions f rom  land use . In 2018,  30 Mt  of CO 2 emissions from the EU originated  from organic soils  (Böttcher et al .  2021) . However,  this is an uncertain effect since  many other factor s contribute to far mer’s land  management decisions .  A more direct contribution to climate change mitigation c ould arise if AI is effectively leveraged to  improve carbon content  of agricultural soils . Cloud Agronomics is using hyperspectral measurements  of soil  and de ep learning to better quantify soil carbon  (Cloud Agronomics 2021) . This technology could  decrease costs of m onitoring soils , at least the upper layer,  and analysing whether measures to increase  soil carbon content are effective.   d. Limits to AI in agriculture   Currently the main focus  of AI applications in agricultu re is not on addressing environmental  concerns , but in increasing productivit y and addressing labour shortages  (Lakshmi & Corbett   2020) . Thus, there is a general lack of data  on the environmental impacts of the technology, especially  considering the diversity of farming systems.  Given that current devel opments are focused on widely  grown crops (e.g. wheat, maize and rice) in industrialis ed farming settings , wide adoption may lead  to unsustainable intensification  (Walter et al. 2017) , perpetuating  current “blind -spots of western  technol ogies ” with regards to different food cultures  and food systems  (FAO 2020) . Most analyses  showing efficiency improvements  focus on the individual farm level  and there is a  knowledge gap  regarding potential  rebound effects that  lead to higher overall inputs across  the agricultural  system  (Paul et al. 2019) .  2.2.5.  AI solutions in other areas addressed by the European Green Deal (circula r  economy, pollution, biodiversity, adaptation to climate change )  a. Circula r economy   There are several o pportunities for AI t o strengthen a circular economy  (Ellen MacArthur Foundati on  (2019) :                                                                7  The EU GHG inventory for 2018 includes the UK and Iceland.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  28  AI can support designers in accelerati ng the design of products, components and materials  with  longer lifetimes, improved recycling capacities , less toxic substances  and lower emissions . An AI system   can suggest initial designs o r adjust designs based on environmental parameters . This makes eco design more effective and deal s with the complexity  of materials . AI in design requires we ll labelled  and complete data bases on materials  and their technical and environmental impacts . An e xample of  a use case for AI in design is t he project ‘ Accelerated Metallurgy’  funded by ESA which developed novel  metal alloy combinations  taking into account circular economy principles such as non -toxic ity, design   for use and r e-use, extending the use period  and minimising waste . AI techniques were used  to map  new alloy s in structure, process and properties based on the chemical, physical and mechanical  properties  and select promising metal alloys taking into account life cycle emissions  (European  Commission 2017) .   At the end  of the product lifetime  AI systems  can assist the inspection, sorting , separation and  disassembling process  to circulate materials in the economy  using  the AI function  of classification  and pattern recognition  to identify objects or materials.  For example, the company ZenR obotics uses  AI-powered robot s to analyse waste streams and to separate waste fractions with high precision  for   different kinds of waste : commercial and industrial waste, municipal solid waste, plastic, packagi ng,  scrap metal or construction and demolition waste  (ZenRobotics 2021) . Companies such as R econext   offer aftermarket device services and reverse supply chain solutions  for electronic devices  ( Reco ntext   2021) . They  use AI to assess  the condition of electronic devices  and determin e if they can be reused,  repaired, refurbished or recycled.   AI can also increase the effectiveness of circular economy business models . Matching algorithms  can connect users on second -hand plat forms with the required product. AI supported predictive  maintenance can steer demand for repairs and extend lifetimes of products.   The potential value unlocked by AI in the circular economy for consumer electronics was estimated by  the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019) at US$  90 billion per year in 2030 through the extension of use  period s (US$ 50 billion), e-waste recovery (US$ 24 billion ), increased material efficiency ( US$ 8 billion)  and optimisation and accelerat ion of innovat ion processes (US$ 8 billion) .  The largest potential for transformational changes is likely to come from a design without waste .  However, whether the enhanced environmental design options presented by AI techno logies  will  really be used in practice  will depend on the regulatory framework and whether there are sufficient  incentives from environment legislation to pursue these options. E.g. in the example presented above  on ‘Accelerated Metallurgy ’, product designers can either use the generat ed information to choose the  cheapest alloy options for a specific product or to choose an economic or environmentally opti mal  option . This example also shows that the reduction of the environmental impacts depends on the  quality of the environmental infor mation available. If 90% of potential metal alloys have never been  tested, there may be unknown detrimental environmental effects and the AI suggested alternative  alloys may still cause new environmental problems.   b. Pollution   AI-based solutions can help simu late, predict , measure as well as  monitor pollutant dispersal . In  addition, it can serve to  optimise and control pollutant removal  from the environment. Such   applications  can be found  in the field of air, soil and water pollution , including  marine pollution as well  as pollution control in relation to wastewater  and solid waste .  For example, w ith regards to clean air, AI applications can provide predictions and/or forecasts of  pollution  levels several  days ahead. In consequence, they can also  provide for air  quality alerts. A lso , as 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       29 PE 662.906  they allow for real- time pollution monitoring and air -pollutant source detection , they can help in the  monitoring and prevention of air pollution  (Liu et a l. 2019) .  One such application, Hawa Dawa, speciali ses in t he measurement and analysis of airborne  contaminants  for a wide range of purposes, such as city planning or health and traffic management . It   integrates  data from multiple  sources such as satellites and public measurement stations , as well as the   company’s  own air quality nodes. Different from  public data collection stations, the air does not require  extensive treatment prior to analysis . Instead , Hawa Dawa uses AI -based calibration algorithms to take  into account cross -sensitivity of the pollutants and exclude environmental factors , such as  temperature, relative humidity or  air pressure from the data. Further data layers , e.g. weather or traffic  date, can also be integrated into the analysis8.  In the field of water pollution, researchers in the UK used m achine learning to identify unreported and  untreated sewage spills from two wastewater treatment plants. The computer algorithm was trai ned  to recognise, through daily effluent flow patterns and operator -reported incidents of untreated sewage  discharges, i .e. known spill events, when a spill was likely happening.  The algorithm reportedl y  detected close to a thousand  previously unreported spills over the course of eleven years  (Hammond  et al. 2021).   c. Adaptation to climate change   For adaptation to climate chan ge it is important to have information on expected climate change  and its precise and regional impacts.  Machine learning techniques have been explored to be  integrated in the climate modelling work. These  techniques may be more accurate or less expensive  where existing models are too computationally expensive or where large amounts of data are available,  but difficult to model in systems with traditional physical -chemical properties and statistics  (Kochanski  2020) . Gentine et al. (2018) trained a deep neura l network on a high- resolution model to better  represent convection and showed that such an approach was much faster and computationally more  efficient: Thus for some model components, AI can be used to accelerate the models and decrease  costs which will b enefit the prediction of climate change and its impacts and can enhance granulari ty  of regional prediction.   To make climate impacts more realistic for more people, researchers from Montreal Institute f or  Learning Algorithms (MILA)  and ConscientAI Labs used  generative adversarial network s, a m a ch ine  learning technique , to simulate what homes are likely to look like after being damaged by rising sea  levels and more intense storms.  Such applications could increase awareness for the need of adaptation  actions  (Snow 2019) .  d. Biodiversity  and nature conservation   In the field of biodiversity and conservation AI -based solutions offer a wide range of opportuniti es.   They can help  in the planning  of conservation  habitat s, e.g. by monitoring ecosystems, detecting  and mo nitoring habitat loss, simulating animal and habitat interaction s or by predicting animal  migration patterns.  For instance, the Group on Earth Observations Biodiversity Observation Network  (GEO BON) uses remotely sensed and in -situ data to support the moni toring of biodiversity and  ecosystem service changes, aiming to provide high quality observations, information and data to  scientists, decision -makers and the public. One of GEO BON’s product s are global change detection  maps of forest cover9.                                                                 8  Additional information can be found on the Hawa Dawa webpage available at : https://hawadawa.com/ .   9  Additional information on the GEO BON products can be found on the GEO BON webpage available at: https://geobon.org/ .  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  30  In relation to species control , AI systems  can be used  to survey  threatened , invasive or dangerous  species and obtain accurate population and location estimates. They can also monitor the health of  certain species. Current commonly used monitoring techniqu es, such as camera traps and surveys  performed on foot, are known to be very resource intensive and potentially inaccurate and impreci se .  AI, in combination with  other technologies, such as unmanned aerial vehicles or miniaturis ed thermal  imaging systems , represent a new opportunity to  survey large r areas  more easily  (World Economi c  Forum 2018).  Projects like “Whaletrack” use satellite tagging to deliver  insights into the migratory  behaviour of whales. Acoustic sensor data can be analysed and evaluated usin g machine learning to  identify different species in a field and study their behaviour  (Liu et al. 2019) .  As already mentioned in s ection 2.1.5 AI can also help in fighting illegal wildlife trade and foster  sustainable trade, e.g. by tracking high -risk animals , detecting illegal activities  via imaging , pr edicting  poach er routes  or optimising patrol schedules , thus allowing authorities to more effectively intervene  (Fang et al. 2017) . In terms of sustainable trade, AI -based solutions can be used to optimise f ood val ue  chain s and supply chain monitoring.   AI-based solutions can moreover be used to assess natural capital , e.g. through registering bio lo gical  and  biomimetic assets and supporting  plant species identification  (World Economic Forum 2018)  For  example, the Earth Bank of Codes aims to create a library of the genomic codes of all known species,   accessible to scientists and businesses  around the world  who seek to develop bio -based innovations.  Its idea is to tap into the wealth of nature  while tackling bio -piracy and ensuring fair and equitabl e  sharing of the commercial benefits . AI techniques used  will include natural language processing, deep  learning, computer vision, probabilistic programming and an array of statistical machine -learning  techniques10.  2.3. State of play and research trends to mitigate the adverse  consequences of AI   The assessment of the environmental impacts  of digital technologies is complex: T he application of AI  requires the use and expansion of digital hardware and infrastructures (such as data centres  and  networks) , which leads direct ly to  an increasing consumpti on of electricity and related material s  and  resource s.   The differentiation of first order , second order and tertiary or systemic  effects (see section 1.3)  is of  specific relevance with respect to approaches and instruments to mitigate adverse environmental  impacts of AI: It can make a big difference for such instruments and approaches whether  e.g. the  production, use and disposal of ICT  hardware or software  is regulated on the basis of clear standards  and targets, or whether the cumulative and indirect effects of the reactions of consumers or companies  to new technologies are taken into account.  We therefore start with discussing  first and second order  envir onmental effects (2.3.1.) followed by  systemic environmental effects (2.3.2.) .  2.3.1.  State of play and research trends in mitigation options to address energy  consumption and resource use and waste generation   a. Energy consumption   AI requires ICT hardware to be pro grammed, trained and deployed in its  productive application phase.   The operation of digital ICT infrastructures and end -devices is a major contributor to overall electricity  consumption.  It is currently not possible to determine the proportion of energy co nsumption caused                                                                10  Additional information on the Earth Bank of Codes can be found on the website available at: https://www.earthbankofcodes.org/ .  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       31 PE 662.906  by the operation of AI  in digital hardware , data centres and networks.  Although the application of AI i s  steadily increasing, to date most ICT hardware is likely to be operated primarily by traditional  algorithm -based softwar e. The following figures therefore represent a gross overview of the estimated  overall power consumption of ICT infrastructure . Most digital data processing today takes place in l arge  data centres  and digital networks, rather than  in user end devices . It can  be assumed that large data  centre s will also be the hotspot of AI application. This is true regardless of the fact that AI functions can   also be implemented in user end devices on a micro level, e.g., in self -learning thermostats.    Digital infrastructures  such as data transmission networks and data centre s have continuousl y  increas ed in size and capacity. A  comprehensive assessment of the energy and resource co n s u mption   of the global digital infrastructure s has not yet been undertaken due to the lack of a global ICT  inventory . The International Energy Agency (IEA 2020) estimates that global i nternet traffic , one of the  measurable indicators of dig itisation , has grown 12 -fold or about 30% per year since 2010. Looking  forward, global i nternet traffic is expected to double to 4.2 trillion gigabytes by  2022.  Data centres ,  digital networks, and other ICT  consume about 7% of the world's electricity  today, and the share is  projected to increase to 13% by 2030 (JRC, 2019).  It has been estimat ed that ICT accounts for 5 -9% of  the world’s total electricity use , which may rise to 20% in 2030 (Enerdata 2018) .  The electricity demand of data centres  in 2019 was around 200 TWh  globally  (see Figure 3). Th is   equals around 0.8% of global final electricity demand . The energy demand of data transmission  networks  accounted for around 1% of global electricity use in 2019 (ibid).   Figure 3: Global data centr e energy demand by data centr e type, 2010- 2022    Source:  IEA 2020 .  The IEA (2021) notes that the total power consumption of data centre s worldwide has not grown  much   since 2010 despite of a 7.5-fold increased computation workload and a 12-fold increased network  traffic. Their future worldwide  energy consumption is estimated to increase by 180% to  366 TWh in  2030 (best case estimate)  (Andrae 2020a) . In the EU, the energy consumption of data ce ntre s has  contin uously  grown during the past two decades ( Figure 4) (JRC, 2019) .      
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  32  Figure 4: Power consumption of data centre s in the EU     Source:  JRC 2019 .  On the other hand, the energy efficiency of data centre s has steadily improved over the last decade.  This results mainly from the substitution of small data centre s by ‘ hyperscale ’ data centre s, which have  better energy efficiency. Such large- scale data centre s can be optimise d for processor efficiency and  idle power consumption reduction (Masanet, et al , 2020) . Between 2016 and 2019, the g lobal  investment in hyperscale data centre s more than doubled from €13 billion to over €29 billion in the  fourth quarter of 2019. This trend is not expected to slow down anyt ime soon, with Amazon, Googl e,  Microsoft, Facebook, and Apple spending the most on hyperscale investments.   Electricity consumption of data networks  is estimated at around 250 TWh in 2019 (IEA 2020) . A  similar value has also been reported by  the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) with 276 TWh  in 2020. The absolute electricity consumption of networks is projected to rise to ab out 300 TWh in 2030  (ITU  2020b ), although data transmission networ ks are rapidly becoming more efficient (IEA 2020).  A  further increase in the global energy consumption for their operation is expected  because global data  traffic is growing exponentially an d therefore a continuous increase in infrastructure capacity i s  necessary . As a consequence,  data centre s and networks for processing and distributing the increasi ng  amounts of data are becoming more and more environmentally impactful due to their immense power  consumption (Liu et al, 2019) .   Belkhir and Elmeligi (2018) estimate that the combined carbon footprint of global data centres  and  communications networks  ranges from 1 .1 to 1 .3 Gt CO 2eq  in 2020.  Andrae (2020b) estimates that  the generation of electricity for data centres  worldwide cause d greenhouse gas  emission s of  approximately 0.16 ± 0.3 Gt CO 2eq  in 2020. A projection for  2030 indicates  that  the operation of data  centre s could contribute  up to 0.42 ± 0.12 Gt to global CO 2 emissions . For mobile network  use, the  same author estimates CO 2 emissions in the range of 0.054±0.08 Gt CO 2eq in 2020 and 0.14±0.06 Gt  CO 2eq in 2030. Emission estimates for optical data networks range from 0.083 ± 0.02 Gt CO 2eq in  2020 and they are expected to rise to 0.15±0.06 Gt CO 2eq in 2030 (ibid).    The impact of AI on power consumption  of data centre s and data transmission network s has not yet  been assessed by publicly available studies . Possible significant paths o f influence of AI on the energy  efficiency of data centre s result from a  better u tilisation  of the existing infrastructure through  intelligent load distribution and management of capacity reserves or back -up capacities.  This includes  the relocation and cen tralisation  of computing capacity from end devices , such as personal computers ,  to data centre s, which have better energy efficiency than most end devices. Hilty et al. (2015) have  determined that “ software solutions for dynamic predictive load management in data centres  promise  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       33 PE 662.906  energy saving potential  of 25% to 30% ”. AI applications of that kind can help to make other computing  systems even more energy efficient . This  can be considered as a second -order effect . For example ,  energy savings ha ve been  observed when  substituting personal computers (PCs) by thin clients for  personal computers . Mehlhart  et al (2016) extrapolated that the EU -wide replacement of 14 million PCs  by 1 8 million thin clients resul ts in potential savings of 4.5 billion MJ per annum in cumulated energy  demand (CED) (as for 2020) . This  translates in a carbon footprint reduction of 0,4 Mt CO 2eq per year . It  can also be assumed that machine learning might become a tool for more efficient scheduling of  computing tasks and compression of data transmission betwe en use end devices and data centre s. AI  could also help optimise  software to become more resource efficient in terms of hardware u tilisation .  Algorithm -based software can influence  the power consumption of computers significantly  (Kern et al  2018).   On the other hand , AI is suspected of being it self an energy -intensive software application . García Martín  et al ( 2019)  conclude from the analysis of training procedures in deep  neural networks  (DNN)  that  “Machine learning algorithms consume significant amounts of energy ”. Luccioni  et al (2020) explain  that the initial network training procedure s requires  enormous amounts of computing hardware time,  which results in high power consumption and ultimately accounts for a large portion of CO 2 emissions.   According to these authors, “the computing power required for key machine learning  tasks has doubled  every 3 months or so, increasing 300 ,000 times between 2012 and 2018” (ibid). They illustrate this with  the  common practice  example of a state -of-the-art facial recognition model which’s  training “ with millions  of parameters can take months on even the most powerful hardware ”. Strubell et al (2019) estimated the  energy -consumption related CO 2 emissions from the training of common DNN -based models for  Natural Language Processing (NLP) . They explain that nowadays, the training of advanced NLP m o dels   requires speciali sed hardware and the training process requires  this hardware to run “ for weeks or  months at a time ” (ibid). Their experimental study of the power consumption of a state -of-the-art  NLP  model during training  and fine -tuning resulted in largely varying power consumpti on, depending on  the respective comb ination of  model architecture and hardware . In the case of neural architecture  search for machine translation and language modelling, the power usage of the data centre  (incl.  cooling ) was determined to be  656, 347 kWh for a single run (ibid) .  b. Consumption of material resources   Direct impacts on natural resources occur first in the production of microelectronic and ICT  components, which form the basis for the operation of digital infrastructures required for the use of AI.   In particular , the pr oduction of active semiconductor components is very energy and resource  intensive. The environmental and social impacts of extracting raw materials  for the manufacture  of digital hardware are particularly evident in metals, such as cobalt, palladium, tantalum, silver,  gold, indium, copper, lithium and alumin ium. ICT har dware  contain s a multitude  o f m a t er ials,  including many element s that are regarded as critical or  that are mined only in small quantities . Digital  end user devices such as  smartphones and tablets are particularly resource consuming types of ICT  becau se of 1) their relatively high content of critical raw materials, 2) the large number of dev ices  in   use, and 3) their rather  short service life, which requires  frequent replacement.  Digital en d u s er dev ices   generate a significant demand for cobalt (~ 9.4% of global primary production) and palladium (~ 8.9%  of global primary production). AI embedded in such short -lived end  user devices, for instance in the  form of tailored neural network, could lead to increasing demand for such materials , as the devices ’  increasing power  consumption would necessitate the use of large batteries.   With regard to data  centre s, resource consumption is determined  not only by their inventory of ICT   components  (e.g. se rvers, data storage), but also by supporting systems  (cooling systems,  uninterruptible power supply, buildings). The latter are usually much weightier than the server 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  34  equipment. They consist mainly  of commoditi sed metals such as steel, alumin ium and copper , as well  as construction materials. The life of the support systems is usually measured in decades. In contrast,  servers are made of typical ICT materials such as semiconductors, copper, precious metals and rare  earths. Server ICT is replaced at intervals  of a few years, up to a maximum of 10 years (depending on  performance requirements). In terms of the depletion of natural resources, this means that the active  ICT components in data centre s are far more relevant than the supporting systems.   c. Approaches to  analysing the direct environmental impact s of AI software   The German Environment Agency  has published research showing that different software with the  same functions, depending on how it is coded, can cause different energy consumption  on the same  hardware  (Gröger et al . 2018 ). The research  also served to develop  a hierarchical catalogue of criteria  for sustainable software (Hilty  et al . 2017) . The method proposes a set of criteria for assessing the  environmental impact of software prod ucts . The criteria encompass , inter alia, energy efficiency,  hardware efficiency (distinguishing local, network and cloud resources ), hardware utilisation  and  sufficiency , software default settings and configurability , hardware resource management and   obsolescence.  On this basis, the same authors also outline a software  tool for the recording and anal ysi s  of evaluation criteria  for software  (Gröger et al . 2018) . The research results support the development  of a possible future “Blue Angel ” eco label  for environmentally relevant software properties  (ibid) .  While the evaluation method described above addresses algorithm -like software, assessing AI will  require further methodological developments . This is because the architecture of AI may differ  significantly from the current architecture of software and hardware. The  techniques  and approaches   used and because it  may even be accompanied by novel hardware design concepts (e.g. field programmable gate arrays , in-memory processing , neuromo rphic chip s). The application context is  also likely to change radically compared to traditional software when AI is used in autonomous systems  with little to no human interaction during runtime , up to the extent that AI takes over the traini ng of  AI. Henc e, the assessment  of energy and resource consumption impacts needs to address the novel  features of AI and its context of use.  AI applications should also be optimise d for their energy and  hardware resource consumption during development and iteratively tested during the training phase  to ensure that they are as energy  efficient as possible. In addition, a monitoring system with suitable  key performance indicators should be developed that documents the energy consumption of each AI  application with verifiab le information.   2.3.2.  State of play and research trends regarding systemic adverse impacts and options  to mitigate these risks   In addition to  direct impacts of AI , systemic  and – possibly  – unintended environmental effects of AI   systems have to be considered . To evaluate such effects, it is necessary to understand  how AI changes  production and consumption patterns,  i.e. what goods and services people consume, how they are  produced, and how the product  systems interact with the environment  (Bieser and Hilty 2018) .   a. Causal factors  of systemic effects of AI   An understanding of how systemic effects relate to the dynamics of AI -based decisions – i.e. on which  level of the decision -making mechanisms of the respective AI  systems ’ problematic steering objectives  evolve – is highly relevant to determine the effective regulatory intervention to implement  sustainability goals. Assessing and evaluating  the real -world effects of AI systems constitutes  a  challeng e. However,  a range of environmental r isks related to individual use contexts  and user  preferences  and the economic  and technol ogical  integration  of systems  have been described  (Bieser  and Hilty 2018) . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       35 PE 662.906  It is important to note  that s ystemic effects, such as overall impacts of incre ased consumption, are not  at all necessarily unintended. Changes of consumer behaviour can  be the primary  objective  or a  welcome side  effect of economic actors who want to increase their sales or market shares: e .g. digital  shopping assistants are specifically designed to ‘nudge ’ users to make purchases by means of  preference- optimised offers and are very much  intended to bring about a significant increase in  consumption  (Hanslik 2018) . From a business perspective,  the integration of AI to boost the   environmental sustainability of purchas es is made to appeal to new consumer segments  (Frank 2021) .  A consequent increase in consumption could  neutrali se the environmental benefits of a more  sustainable production .  The potential of AI for information gathe ring, optimisation  and improved decision -making is not  limited to environmentally  friendly applications and can of course also be used for activities that c ause  environmental problems. M achine learning  is currently widely used to increase oil and gas produc ti on  (NETL 2020) . The Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) launched the Centr e for  Integrated Operations in the Petroleum Industry, focused on developing novel and innovative  methods based on AI for oil and ga s production optimisation  (Dale and Uglane 2018) . As a nother   example, the m achine learning tools  of tech giants are being commerciali sed to help oil and gas  companies  locate fields and maximi se production , e.g. by creat ing more accurate 3D models of rock  and fluid properties that reveal exactly where to drill  (Koroteev  and Tekic  2021) . A recent Greenpeace  report indicated that Amazon, Microsoft and Google have all established contracts to use AI to unloc k  oil and gas deposits with major oil and gas companie s such as Shell, BP  and others  (Greenpeace 2020) .  More  generally , it is  assumed  that commercial actors tend to implement steering goals when designing  AI systems which  are incompatible with public welfare goals , and ‘private sector ’ AI systems might be  more prone to create negative externalities  (Slee 2020) . This  assumption  also supported by empirical  studies in prominent  fields of application for sustainable AI systems, for example in agriculture   (Wuepper et al . 2020) .  In many cases, ad verse effects of AI systems are  consequences of interactions of the AI  systems ’ design   and the adaptation of  user or producer behaviour as a reaction to the new techn ologies. Adverse  effects resulting from changed consumption patterns have prominently been  identified  for Video  Streaming Services: Streaming movies and TV series on platforms such as Netflix is significantly more  energy -efficient than using DVDs. Since flat rate offers are cheaper and access to movies on streaming  services is less complicated,  however,  considerably more movies are watched overall, which erodes the  efficiency advantage of streaming. More generally, as the efficiency of available computer systems  increases due to better  technolog ies, so do the demands on the energy and resource i ntensive  capabilities of the operating system and software  (Sühlmann- Faul  and Rammler  2018) . The overall  negative environmental impacts related to the increasing use of self -driving cars as described in s ection   2.2.3.g. also illustrate how an interplay of user  behaviour, intended design and the overall integration  of AI systems in society may lead to adverse systemic effects.   Other  prominent examples illustrate that adverse consequences  of AI systems due to changed   consumer  behaviour  can even run contrary to the intended pro-environmental functions of a n  application : e.g. product s designed  to automatically manage and implement more efficient  energy   consumption might  have unintended consequences on consumption behaviour  by inducing people  to abdicate their control of energy consumption . This  can ultimately result in excessive energy  consumption  (Puntiroli et al. 2019) . Knowing that a product is sustainable is likely to  actually increase  consumption – for example using more water or energy in ecolodges  (Font  and McCabe  2017) . This is  also described  for p erceived environmental benefits based on AI  systems to enhance the 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  36  environmental sustainability of products, which acco rdingly  can drive a consumer’s purchase intent   (Frank 2021) , even if this may not be the objective.    The structural problems behind  the adverse and possibly unintended environmental effects caused by  AI have not yet been systematically investigated. However, there are good arguments for looki ng at  such problems under the aspect of data input . The rise of ethically problematic decisions due to  qualitatively insufficient data input  has been frequently  described , e.g. when  the data basis of AI  decisions reflects previous discrimination s, which then are perpetuated and reinforced by the decis ions   (EU Fundamental Rights  Agency 2019) . Comparable  deficits and dynamics however also may  be  identified  in many systems that develop their steering goals on the basi s of feedback  data on everyday  habits or consum er preferences . These data may be qualitatively insufficient with regard to  sustainability aspects  in systems which can create negative external effec ts, as they neither represent  value s of nature nor the preferences  of third parties  or the common good  (see Bonnefon et al. 2016) .  Systems that form their objectives based on pre- existing consumption preferences or patterns of  behaviour thus could further reinforce unsustainable habits and practices. Regarding  risks of  discrimination, consideration should be given to how externalised  (common)  interests can be fed into  the dynamics of AI decision -making .  Summari sing, the  question s of how systemic environmental effects can be avoided and how  environmental goals can be integrated into algorithms must  focus on the decision -m a king  mechanisms of AI  systems as a whole . The examples indicate that regulation may  target two general   entry  points  to implement green goals  into AI systems: On the one hand, ‘ green ’ polic ies can focus  on the developers or providers of algorithms . On the other hand, the goals of AI systems are not onl y  integrated by design in line with the intention of the produc ers, but also develop automaticall y and  dynamically  based on data . Thus, regulation must specifically also take into account the data used to  train AI.   b. Instruments to mitigate systemic effects   Awad et  al. (2020)  summari ses three points , which may  make it difficult for  common  regulat ory  approaches  and policie s to tackle negative externalities of AI . First, intelligent machines are often bl ac k  boxes: it can be unclear how exactly they process their input to arrive at a decision, even to those who  actually programmed them in the first place.  Second, intelligent machines may be constantly learning  and changing their perceptual capabilities or decision processes, outpacing human efforts at defining  and regulating their negative externalities. Third, even when an intelligent machine is shown to have  made biased decisions, it can be unclear whether the bias is due to its decision process or learned from  the human behavio ur it has been trained on or interacted with.  Further research is needed on  s u it able   instruments  of environmental law and policy to deal with these obstacles .   Based on the above -mentioned  entry points for environmental regulation , programmes , and  initiatives, three types  of approaches may be differentiated .  First, g iven the relevance of human decisions regarding the design of AI  systems , regulation may  focus  on empowering specific actors , incentivise sustainable applications and  on improving their  market opportunities . Numerous approaches in this sense aim at promot ing the implementation of  sustainability goals by exerting influence on actor constellations or by improving the market conditions  for sustainable AI. For example, the German Ministry for  the Environment , Nature Conservation and  Nuclear Safety  sponsors specific  AI flagship  projects  (BMU 2 021) . The market opportunities for  sustainable innovations may also be strengthened by loans aligned with the future EU taxonomy  or by  targeted  ‘green ’ adjustments to p ublic procurement law (Hedberg  and Šipka 2020) . With a view to 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       37 PE 662.906  actors  ope rating in the public interest , consideration can be  given to how municipalities can become  more active in fields of the digital economy to pursue municipal policy objectives  (Ringwald et al. 2019) .  Secondly , instruments of precautionary environmental law  appear suitable , in principle, for  addressing complex environmental impacts that are associated with systemic and possibly non intended effects of A I. European environmental law stipulates metrics , targets and/or independent risk  assessments , e.g. of  manufacturers of hazardous  produc ts, and is intended precisely to better deal with  indirect , cumulative risks and impacts  that are difficult to predict, measure and attribute  (Reese 2010) .  It is thus hardly surprising when scholars propose instruments suc h as binding environmental impact  assessment s to address systemic  environmental effects of AI  (Rejeski et al . 2018) . It has been  dis cuss ed  how Environmental I mpact Assessments provide a partial blueprint for the assessment  of impact s of AI   on human rights and interests ( Calvo et.al., 2020).  It should , however,  be further analysed how the  assessment of environmental impacts of AI  can be integrated in the existing European regulatory  framework and how existing approaches for the assessment of environmental im pacts could  be  adapted to the reflect the specific characteristics o f AI Research  that generates empirical data and  appropriate standards11 is a prerequisite  for developing appropriate regulatory instruments to assess  the environmental impact of AI.   In pri nciple, such  legal approaches  seem to be compatible with  proposals  for an AI Regulation , such  as the recently proposed  EU Artificial Intelligence Act12. The proposal for the regulation stipulates ,  on the one hand principle -based requirements that AI systems should comply with. On the other hand,  it is centred on a risk -based regulatory approach . The Artificial Intelligence Act  stipulates that ‘high -risk’  AI systems that pose significant risks to the health and safe ty or fundamental rights of persons will have  to comply with a set of horizontal mandatory requirements for trustworthy AI and follow conformi ty  assessment procedures before those systems can be placed on the Union market  (European  Commission 2021c  ). This risk -based approach is comparable to previous proposals which suggest   providing  for differentiated duties to control and correct algorithms, depending on the severity and  probability of harm . (Datenethikkommission 2019 , Zweig 2019) .   Approa ches to assess and control the environmental risks  of AI  ex ante  are plausible , in particular , for   key technologies such as autonomous driving  and should be further  investigated . It should  be  acknowledged, however, that  environmental risks do not play a significant role in the proposals  or  ongoing stand ardisation  efforts  to date . The proposal for an EU Artificial Intelligence Act refer s to  environmental sustainability with respect to potential infringements of the  right to a high level of  environmental p rotection and the improvement of the quality of the  environment (Article  37 of the EU  Charter of Fundamental Rights ) including  in relation  to the health  and  safety  of people . Environmental  sustainability can also be included in the proposed framework for c reating voluntary codes of conduc t  (Title IX).  At least where human rights  or clearly defined human interests are not simultaneousl y  concerned,  environmental risks  remain outside  of the scope of the binding norms  of the proposal . More   general ly, the difficulties  to assess and allocate risks  triggered by AI , which may lead to environmental  impacts  as a result of several interacting causes and potentially in the long term , could pose a n o bs tacle  to a risk -based approach to regulation. There is still a n eed for research on how and to what extent  precautionary, risk -based regulation of algorithms can contribute to a n effective regulation of  co m p lex,   dispersed or cumulative environmental hazards .                                                                11  See above, section 2.3.1. c.   12  Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council Laying d own harmonized rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificia l  Intelligence Act), COM  (2021) 206 final , 21.4.2021.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  38  Data regulation  and data governance should  be considered as a third general approach  to  regulating AI.  This already follows from the overarching relevance of training data and feedback data  for the production and operation of AI system s. From an environmental policy perspective, it appears  essenti al to ensure sufficient access to data for sustainable applications and regulators.  Data also plays  a significant role  for other policy  instruments: E.g., in  isolation from adequate data governance , funding  mechanisms , which  support sustainab le AI applications or aim at empowering public interest actors  may have little chance of success.  Strong legal or technical barriers to us ing relevant data , whether held  publicly or privately, can hinder both meaningful innovation and appropriate regulation of and by AI .  Access to the data , used to train  AI systems,  is also necessary for a risk -adapted AI regulation. The  problem of complex and dynamic decision -making systems is tackled  by analysing the processed data.    Data not only conditions and enables other r egulatory  approaches . It is also  increasingly understood   that  the way in which access to data is organi sed – i.e. how data is shared and how authority  and control  over data  is alloc ated – is fundamental for the outcomes of AI  decisions  (Janssen et al. 2020) . Data  governance and data regulation s thus  could  help  to ensur e that relevant AI systems make  t h eir   decisions in accordance with principles  of an ecological common good.  Recent proposals and debates  about alternative, democratic data  governance  or representative data rights  (Hummel et al . 2020,  Vilijoen 2020; Fezer 2018)  indicate  towards  legal and organi sational pathways to integrat e data into  the decision -making mechanisms  of AI systems, which may reflect  sustainability  principles better than   systems which rely on data on consumer preferences  or habits .   Enabling citizens to actively decide , who can use their data and for what purposes, combined wi th  trustworthy technologies, processes and actors, can  also  create incenti ves to share or generate such  data. In this context, for example, the creation of registered “ data altruis m organisations ” under the  recently proposed European Data Governance Regulation  (European C ommission 2020f ) is intended  to help ensure a higher level of trust in data provision and thus contribute to more data being made  available by data subjects and companies in order to achieve higher levels of development and  research .    
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       39 PE 662.906  3. EU PROGRAMMES AND IN TERNATIONAL COOP E R AT I ON   3.1. EU programmes  and policies   In addition to the recent proposal of a  European  AI Act , briefly described above, a number of other  EU  programmes and policies have to be mentioned.  A digital transformation which contributes to a  sustainable, climate -neutral and resource -efficient economy is a key objective of the Commission ’s  digital strategy  and its White Paper on Artificial Intelligence (European Commission 2020a, 2020b) .  Both understand AI as a critical enabler for attaining the goals of the EGD. T he White Paper on AI focus es  on the legal and ethical framework necessary to create an ‘ecosystem of trust’  for AI and outlines how  the Commission will support and promote the development and uptake of trustworthy and human cent red AI in the EU.   The European Data Strategy  is part of the coordinated plan on AI and provides specific link ages  to  environmental challenges and the sectors covered by the EGD. The data strategy aims to create “ a  single European data space where personal as well as non -personal data,  including sensitive business data,  are secure and businesses also  have easy access to an almost infinite amount of high -quality industrial data,  boosting growth and creating value, while minimising the human carbon and environmental footprint ”  (European C ommission 2020c )  The data strategy also plans a specific ‘ Common Europe Green Deal Data Space’ to support the Green  Deal priority actions on climate change, circular economy, zero  pollution, biodiversity, deforestation  and compliance assurance and to init iate a ‘ GreenData4All ’ initiative. This initiative will evaluate and  possibly review the Directive establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the EU (INSPIRE),  together with the Access to Environment Information Directive. Another action is the roll out of data   services on a large scale to assist in collecting, sharing, processing and analysing large volumes of data  relevant for assuring compliance with environmental legislation planned for 2021. In the area of circular  economy, digital ‘prod uct passports’  will be developed that will provide information on a produc t’s  origin, durability, composition, reuse, repair and dismantling possibilities, and end -of-life handling. I n  the context of the ‘zero pollution ambition’ where large amounts of dat a on chemicals exist, a pilot for  the data strategy will be implemented in 2021. The ‘Destination Earth’  initiative will build a high  precision digital twin  of the Earth as a digital monitoring platform to visuali se, monitor and forec ast  natural and human activity on the planet. The sectoral data spaces offer additional opportuni ti es  related to the EGD for example in the following areas:   • in the transport sector: the r eview of the regulatory framework for interoperable data -sharing  in rail transport in 2022 ;   • in the energy sector: actions for improving the interoperability in smart buildings and products,  actions to improve their energy efficiency, optimise local consumption and broaden the  integration of renewable energy sources ; and   • in the agriculture sect or: in 2019 M ember States  signed a declaration of cooperation titl ed  ‘A  smart and sustainable digital future for European agriculture and rural areas’, which recogni ses  the potential of digital technologies for the agricultural sector and rural areas and supports the  establishment  of data spaces . In 2021, the Commission wil l take stock of the existing  agricultural data spaces with M ember States  and stakeholders and decide on an EU approach.   The work on access to environment al data in the data strategy is not specifically focused on AI, but i t i s  a prerequisite for AI applications to support the targets of the EGD.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  40  The proposed ‘ Regulation on D ata Governance’  (European C ommission 2020f ) is a key output of the  data strategy.  The regulation will support the set -up and development of common European data  spaces in strategic domains, such as environment, energy, agriculture, mobility, finance, manufacturi ng  and public administration.  Sector -specific legislation on data access has al so been adopted in some  fields related to the EGD , e.g. smart metering information13, electricity network data14, or intelligent  transport systems15.  Regarding  adverse impacts of AI, the EU Digital Strategy announced , “initiatives to achieve climate neutral, highly energy -efficient and sustainable data centre s by no later than 2030 ”. To meet this goal, the  Commission will rely on a mix of existing instruments  and reviews of existing legislation such as:   • the Ecodesign Re gulation on servers and data storage products ;  • the EU Code of Conduct on Data Centre  Energy Efficiency ;   • the EU  Green Public Procurement criteria for data centre s, server rooms and cloud services ; and  • the Energy Efficiency Directive, currently under review , which aims to set measures for the  recovery of waste heat.   The EU Taxonomy Regulation16 for sustainable investment includes a section on data processi ng  including data centre s and the Commission is currently conducting a study to address the lack of  commonly accepted definitions and methods to assess the energy efficiency, climate neutrality and   overall sustainability of data centre s (European Parliament 2021) .  Public and private Investment in AI research and innovation in Europe is still lower than i n other regions   (European Commission 2020b) . In 2016 about $3 to 4 billion were invested in AI in Europe compared  to around $8 to 12 billion in Asia and $15 to 23 billion in North America. This situation triggered the  “Coordinated Plan on AI ” developed wit h Member States with the aim to build closer cooperation,  create synergies and maximise investment in the AI value chain in Europe. The new EU Multiannual  Financial Framework for 2021- 2027 is expected to strengthen the digital capacity through targeted  programmes, in particular the Digital Europe Programme (DEP), the Connecting Europe Facility   (CEF2), Horizon Europe  and the Space Programme. In the DEP, €2.5 billion from a total budget of €7.6  billion are earmarked for AI. The digital strategy aims at boosti ng investments in AI research, innovati on  and adoption with a target of annual €20 billion in AI -related investment from the public and private  sector s after 2020.   The DEP is the first financial instrument of the EU with the aim to bring AI to businesses a nd public  administrations. DEP funding is also available for the  European data space, safe access to and storage  of large datasets and trustworthy and energy efficient cloud infrastructure. The programme also  supports AI testing and experimentation facilit ies. However, it is not clear to what extent DEP funding  will also prioriti se the goals of the EGD.  A key part of the DEP are European Digital Innovation Hubs.  The extent to which the planned innovation hubs address environmental sustainability and the E GD  goals  should be a key criteri on in the selection of applications.   Horizon Europe will fund a cluster on ‘Digital, Industry and S pace’ with a budget of €15.349 billion  which includes areas of invention on artificial intelligence and robotics in transport, agriculture, or  energy, circular industries, low carbon and clean industries and the enhancement of  services from                                                                13  Directive 2019/944 for electricity, Directive 2009/73/EC for gas meters.   14  Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/1485, Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/703.   15  Directive 2010/40/EU.   16  Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of the European Parliament and Council (2020).  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       41 PE 662.906  Copernicus and Galileo for citizens and policy making  (European Commission 2021a, 2021b) . The  cluster on ‘Climate, Energy, Mobility’ will rece ive €15.123 billion and the Cluster on ‘Food, Bioeconomy,  Natural Resources, Agricu lture and Environment’ € 8.952 billion. The latter includes a focus area on  ‘agriculture of data’. The detailed programming activities of Horizon Europe have not yet been rel eased  to assess t he extent to which these priorities include AI techniques and approaches . Data sharing wil l  be a prerequisite for the funded research projects. Horizon Europe also includes a new partnership on  ‘Artificial Intelligence, Data and Robotics ’. The CEF2 Digital programme supports and catalyses  investments in digital connectivity infrastructures of common interest during the period 2021  – 2027  and creates a foundation in networks and connectivity for AI applications.   Thus, t he EU  key activities and the EU  research agenda address both AI and the goals of the EGD  as a  priority and are  in this respect quite advanced compared to Member States , where only Germany has  set up research activities to specifically support AI related to the European Green D eal (see S ection 4).  3.2. International Policies and Programmes   Many international initiatives on the relation of AI and the Sustainable Development Goals were started  in the second half of the 2010s. They encompass public as well as private business  or multi -stakeholder  processes and can be differentiated in   • dialogues and partnerships to understand the potential and to further the development of AI  to contribut e to sustainable development ;  • international cooperation supporting countries to harness AI for sustainable development ; and  • initiatives for a common governance of AI to ensure its positive contribution to sustainable  development.   Often these initiatives sta rted as broader dialogues and then became more concrete and action  oriented over time. H owever, most of them lack a  focus on the environmental dimension and they do  not cover it on equal terms with other legitimate development interests.    3.2.1.  Dialogues and par tnerships to understand the potential and to further the  development of AI  to contribute to sustainable development  In 2017 the UN started its ‘ AI for Good ’ global summit series hosted by the International  Telecommunication Union ( ITU) in cooperation with other UN organi sations  envisaged as the leading  dialogue platform on AI contributing to the SDGs. Over the years the s ummit series developed from a  more traditional international conference into a platform with different formats for co mmunication,  exchange and learning. For example , as an outcome of the 2019 conference , the ‘AI Commons ’ was   launched to help connect AI adopters with AI specialists and data owners , to promote the shari ng of  collaborative frameworks as well as templates, r oadmaps and examples of AI solutions for the c ommon  good, and to promote a common approach vis -à-vis AI resources , including data  (AI Commons 2021) .  Also in 2019, a number of open focus groups were established , amongst them a ‘Focus Group on  Machine Learni ng for Future Networks, including 5G’ and a ‘Focus Group on Environmental Efficienc y   for AI and Other Emerging Technologies ’ tasked with identif ying the respective stand ardisation  needs .  The thematic focus of the summit has  shifted over the years: AI to solve  environmental problems w as  included in the program mes, but often not very prominently, e.g. in 2017 only two  of the showc ased  23 applications , namely ‘Global Fishing Watch’ and IBM’s project ‘Lucy’ on agriculture contribut ed to  environmental objectives  (ITU, 2017) . Of the 16 Breakthrough Groups in the program me, none foc used  on an environmental theme. In 2020 with the Covid -19 pandemic , the series moved from yearly  conferences to nearly weekly virtual events. While the  overall thematic coverage broadened, o n ly  eight  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  42  of the more than 130 virtual events of the AI for Good series in  2020 and 2021 addressed environmental  issues (ITU 2020a , Gates and Ma 2019) .  In February of 2021,  UNEP in collaboration with UNESCO, StartUp Inside and Microsoft launched a seri es  of monthly virtual sessions on best practices of AI under the title ‘ AI for the Planet ’. Focus areas are  climate change, nature and biodiversity, waste and pollution, and mobility.   Apart from processes like the ones described above,  the UN publishes a yearly compendium on ‘ U nited  Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence ’ showcasing their institutions’ related initiatives  (UN  2018, 2019, 2020) . Furthermore, international organi sations also set up platforms to enter and searc h  for use cas es, organi sations , stakeholders  and policies focusing on AI, like the UN  AI Repository  (ITU  2021)  or the OECD AI Policy Observatory (OECD 2021) .  A prominent multi -stakeholder initiative is the ‘Partnership on AI’  already established in 2016 by the  large US -based digital companies Amazon, DeepMind/Google, Facebook, IBM, and Microsoft . Its goal s  are “ first, to develop and share best -practice methods and approaches in the research, development, testing,   and fielding of AI technologies; second, to advance public understanding of AI across varied constituencies,   including on core technologies, potential benefits, and costs; third, to provide an open and inclusive  platform for discussion and engagement on the future of A I, and to ensure that key stakeholders have the  knowledge, resources, and overall capacity to participate fully in these important conversations and fourth  to identify and foster aspirational efforts in AI for socially benevolent application s” (Partnership on AI 2021 ).  An important focus of the partnership is to build capacities , through research, discussions, educational  material, etc. , to understand and engage i n discussions on the future of AI. By now the partnershi p  comprises more than 100 organisation s from 13 countries , of which more than half are non- pr o fit   entities including many professional associations, universities and think  tanks but also UNICEF and  UNDP. However , the partnership has not produced materials that address the environme ntal  perspective of AI in a significant scope.   Another recent  multi -stakeholder initiative is  the UN Secretary -General’s Roadmap on Digital  Cooperation  (UN 2020)  where the primary o bjective is “ to firmly anchor environmental sustainability  needs within the Digital Cooperation Roadmap and cataly se a digital planet for sustainability ”. Specific  objectives are to “ 1. offer a vision and authoritative framing of the environmental sustainability and  digit alisation  nexus; 2. establish an acceleration plan [note of the author: by September 2021] for digitalizing  environmental sustainability of including immediate priorities and partnerships covering a 2 -3 year  perspective; 3) help uni te various environmental sustainability and digit alisation  tracks under a common  framework and federation umbrella to improve coordination, coherence and impact and 4) mobilize the  scientific community and prioritize a research agenda”  (UNEP 2021) .  Given t he potential and relevance of using satellite data for achieving environmental objectives and  the potential of AI for the interpretation of satellite imagery , another potentially relevant  multi stakeholder initiative is the Open UN GIS Initiative  and there in the GEO -AI Working Group 5 . It  started work in September 2020 and is  co-chaired by UN Global Pulse and FAO. T he working group ’s  activities “ to research, elaborate and adopt innovations, best practices, and recommendations to […]  research AI applications  and methodologies that can support geospatial analysis, including image  interpretation; promote interoperability between opensource AI and GIS frameworks; enhance and develop  opensource standards and tools for the wider AI and GIS communities ”, could be especially relevant for  environmental purposes  (UN Global Pulse, FAO 2020) .  With the Open for Good Alliance , UNESCO and partners are addressing to overcome a shortage  of  locally  relevant t raining data and  to address  technical questions by initiatives which  work on access to  AI. The alliance  hence is working on increasing the availability and quality of openly available, 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       43 PE 662.906  representative and non -discriminatory data, specifically localis ed training data for local AI  development in Africa , Asia and beyond  (Open for Good 2021) .  The OECD supports governments by measuring and analy sing the impacts of AI technologies a n d also   elaborate s recommendations related to policy and institutional frameworks for AI  as well as AI  principles (see below) . In addition, the above -mentioned  OECD Policy Observatory on AI provides a  useful resource for the development of respective policies. The Policy O bservatory includes a category  for AI and  the env ironment which indicates that besi des five EU Member States (Germany, Netherlands,  Denmark, Portugal), relatively few other countries have policy initiatives for AI related to the  environment (China, India, Japan, Korea, Australia  with each one initiative and UK with two initi atives).   Besides the work of the intergovernmental organisatio ns, there are many other international activities.  Climate Change AI  (CCAI) is an organi sation composed mainly of researchers , engineers  and industry  who believe that machine learning can play an impactful role  related to climate change. The  organi sation aims at building a community of diverse stakeholders , advance the discussion and  provide advice , develop educational resources and programs  and f ill gaps in essential infrastructure  such as funding, tools, and datasets  (Climate Change AI 2021) . This organi sation has compiled the  largest structured analysis of scientific publications related to AI and climate change  (Rolnik et al. 2019) .  3.2.2.  Initiatives for a common governance of AI in order to ensure its positive  contribution to sustainable development   The first intergovernmental standards on AI were developed and agreed upon  by the OECD Member  States and additional countries in May 2019. The  principles for AI adopted by the G20 in June 2019 have  been “ drawn from the OECD Recommendation on AI”  (G20 2019) . The OECD  principles focus on  responsible stewardship and trustworthiness of AI . The y focus on i)  orienting AI towards inclusive  growth, sustainable development and well- being , ii) basing AI on human- centr ed values and fairness,  iii) permitting transparency  and explainability, iv)  ensuring robustness, security and safety, and v)  calling for accountability. However, they only  touch upon the environmental dimension of sustainabl e  development with one short reference, stating that “ Stakeholders should proactive ly engage in  responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI in pursuit of beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, such  as […] protecting natural environments […] thus invigorating inclusive growth, sustainable development  and well -being ” (OECD 2021) . They also  prescribe that “ AI actors should […] apply a systematic risk  management approach to each phase of the AI system lifecycle […] to address risks related to AI systems  including privacy, digital security, safety and bias ” but do not mention environm ental risks in the  examples given. While their general scope allows for adherence by countries around the globe , the  principles provide little guidance or safeguards for an ecologically sustainable development and  operation of AI. T he G20 principles do not  go beyond this  either .  In 2018 , the Secretary General of the United Nations initiated his Roadmap for Digital Cooperation  process by setting up a High Level Panel on Digital Cooperation and  commission ing it  “to consider how  digital cooperation can contrib ute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals ” and “to  consider models of digital cooperation to advance the debate surrounding governance in the digital  sphere .” The resulting report ‘The age of digital interdepen den ce’ contained the broad  recommendation that AI systems “ should be designed in ways that enable their decisions to be explained  and humans to be accountable for their use. Audits and certification schemes should monitor compliance  of AI systems with engineering and ethical standard s, which should be developed using multi -stakeholder  and multilateral approaches ” (Gates and Ma 2019).    Adding to various ethical frameworks with a more limited scope , UNESCO  is currently working on a set  of recommendation s on the e thics of A I that aims to go beyond values and principles by also in clu ding 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  44  concrete policy recommendations. The recommendations are scheduled to be adopted by UNESCO’s  General Conference at its 41st session at the end of 2021 . They include  a framework for  operationa lisation , includ ing through  ethical impact assessment s to address the challenges and  opportunities of AI for all individuals and communities  for which UNESCO is planning to support  Member States in developing a globally accepted methodology for Ethical Imp act Assessment (EIA) of  AI technologies . The assessments are thought to encompass an ex -ante level  to avoid discrimination  in the selection of datasets  and programmers’ design choices and to make transparent the values  informing these choices  and an ex -post level  monitoring outcomes that could infringe individual rights   (UNESCO 2019) .   From an environmental sustainability perspective, the first draft of the recommendation on the ethics  of artificial intelligence goes beyond the OECD principles. Consideratio n of the environmental  perspective and aspects can be found throughout the whole document: ‘Environment and ecosystem  flourishing’ to be recogni sed and promoted by AI is listed as the second item in the section on values.  There, the recommendations reiterate the obligation to follow the precautionary principle and call for  AI actors to reduce the environmental impact of AI systems. In the section on principles, the principle  ‘sustainability’ calls for “ the continuous assessment of the social, cultural, economic and environmental  impact of AI technologies ” oriented by the SDGs. The draft recommendations also include a subsection  on ‘environment and eco systems’ urging to “ assess the direct and indirect environmental impact  throughout the AI system life cycle, including but not limited to, its carbon footprint, energy consumption,   and the environmental impact of raw material extraction for supporting the manufacturing of AI  technologies ” and proposing to apply data, energy and resource -efficient AI methods. In addition,  appropriate evidence should be required proving that an AI application will have the intended effect  or accompanying safeguards will ensur e so. The subsection further calls on Member States to  “introduce incentives […] to ensure the development and adoption of rights -based and ethical AI -powered  solutions for disaster risk resilience; the monitoring, protection and regeneration of the enviro nment and  ecosystems; and the preservation of the planet ” supporting “ circular economy type approaches and  sustainable consumption and production patterns ” (UNESCO 2020) .  A very recent initiative to support the dialogue on international cooperation and gl obal governance  for AI was launched by Tsinghua University  in China and supported by the UNDP . The  inaugural  International AI Cooperation and Governance Forum  took  place in Beijing in March 2021. It aims to  become the leading platform for global level disc ussions on AI governance and international  cooperation. The forum illustrated the unanimous view that global AI governance is indispensabl e   (UNDP 2020) .  The need for more global governance is also highlighted in the recent World  Development Report 2021  focusing on data. The report h ighlight s the essential role of data sets as prer equisites and basis  for  AI  applications  and the econom ic interests posing  challenges for  open access to data and/or shari ng of  data . It states that “ a global consensus is needed to ensure that data are safeguarded as a global public  good and as a resource to achieve equitable and sustainable  development .” It goes on referencing  the  increasing  number o f voices , calling for “some sort of global charter or  convention […] to realize the  benefits of data in a saf e and secure way and to avoid destructive beggar thy neighbor strategies ”, be it a  ‘Bretton Woods for AI ’ (Rockefeller Foundation) or a ‘Digital Geneva Convention’ (Microsoft)  (World   Bank 2021) . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       45 PE 662.906  4. CURRENT TRENDS AND B EST PRACTICES IN AI P OLI C Y  AT   MEMBER STA TE LEVEL   In 2018, the C oordinated Plan on AI was published in which Member States and the Commission agreed  to enhance Europe’s competitiveness related to AI and to deal with social, economic, eth ical and legal  questions  (European Commission 2018). In addition, all Member States agreed to establish an AI  strategy. The c oordinated plan also established AI Watch , the European Commission ’s knowledge  service to monitor the development, uptake and impac t of AI for Europe. The European Commissi on  also collaborates with the OECD on analysing National strategies on AI and exchange on thei r  respective platforms, being the OECD AI Policy Observatory and AI Watch. M ember States  often use  different titles for t heir strategies or action plans on AI and the documents are not very comparable  with regard to their content, length and focus areas , which also limits th e following  analysis  o f n a t ional  strategies of Member States to some extent .   From 27 Member States, f our (Croatia, Greece, Ireland, Romania) have not yet developed final AI  strategies. Out of the remaining 23 Member States,  eight  strategies (Austria, Estonia, Latvia, Cyprus,  Czech Republic, Luxembourg, Poland, Slovakia) do not focus on EGD priorities or do not menti on  specific initiatives to promote AI applications related to environmental problems.   From the remaining 15 national AI strategies, nine  strategies include priority or focus areas for AI  applications related to environmental problems, e.g. increase energy efficiency or energy  management, sustainable agriculture solutions, sustainable transport, smart and sustainable citi es that  address environmental issues (Belgium, Bulgaria, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Portugal, Slovenia,  Spain, Sweden). The most frequent ly mentioned  area is agriculture and the intention to develop  precision farming. Smart traffic management to av oid traffic jams and optimisation of urban transport  as well as smart grids in the energy sector and smart and sustainable cities are other focus area that  appear in many strategies.   The strategies of s ix Member States go beyond such priority area s:  Denmar k intends to be a frontrunner , using AI to support the green transition. The country  developed the following priority approaches  (Danish Government 2019) :  • The public sector should benefit from an intelligent environmental monitoring, predicti on of  flooding  during cloudburst events and management of drainage systems.   • The Danish  government will identify five public -sector datasets, which can be made availabl e  for businesses, researchers and public. The datasets will not contain personal data, but rather  envir onment and climate data from the transportation sector.   • Through membership of ESA, Denmark is also helping to gather and process large amounts of  weather, environment and climate data. Most of this data is freely available for citizens,  businesses, public authorities and researchers .  In addition , the following p riority areas  were identified:   • Energy and utilities: Use of AI  to develop new products, services and business models. The  products can help other businesses as well as consumers to optimise their energy consumption  and thereby reduce their costs and carbon footprint .  • Agriculture: A I to support the development of prec ision agriculture in order to continue  sustainable agriculture in Denmark.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  46  • Transport: In the transport area, AI  can be used to ensure better and more timely public  transport. Furthermore, new solutions can be developed to optimise traffic management to  benefit users of both public and private transport.   A number of spe cific projects have been established in Denmark  related to AI and EGD topics.  The  Danish funding for the AI strategy with 24 initiatives has been set at €9.2 million  for the period 2019 2027. The budget has since been reprioritised and lowered to €5 million .  Hungary also committed in its national AI strategy to develop AI to be high -tech and green. Hungary  is the only Member State with quantified environmental targets  in the AI strategy  (Ministry for  Innovation and T echnology et al. 2020) . Due to the use of data -based systems, the emission s of  ammonia in agriculture should decrease by 32%  by 2030. By 2030, 70% of the scheduling of renewable  energy production  should be  carried out by smart technologies .  Hungary’s AI strategy includes transformative programmes  which address several areas of the EGD:   • climate -driven agriculture: AI to help mitigate adverse impacts of climate change in agriculture ;  • development and applicatio n of AI -based, optimisation solutions in terms of plant produc ti on  and stock farming, i mplementation of predictive, AI -based analytics methods to improve  water, soil and air quality to enhance the efficiency of management ;  • establishment of an agricultural data framework system including environmental data to  enhance efficiency of government operations and develop new services for farmers ; and   • implementation of smart  grid  technologies to facilitate the creation of a more accurate  production timeline for weat her-dependent renewable energy sources and the operation of  the energy network.   In addition to the transformative programmes, focus areas include  sector -specific focus on smart and  environmentally conscious manufacturing, AI -based, automatic traffic management to reduce traffic  jams, optimisation of urban public transport networks, passenger counts, journey optimisati on,  introduction of smart heati ng cost sharing for apartments using central or district heating services and  the development of data -driven energy market models.   France’s national AI strategy also includes a strong commitment to u se AI opportunities in the  environmental area to contribu te to a smart ecological transition  (President of the French Republic  2019) . Priority areas are:   • transport: zero -emission  urban mobility ;  • agriculture : development of monitoring tools for farmers will pave the way for smart  agriculture benefiting the entir e agrifood chain ; and   • making AI more environmentally friendly .  France also outlines specific initiatives and actions in this area:   • it intends to creat e a research centre  focusing on AI and the ecological transition ;  • it wants to implement a platform to meas ure the environmental impact of smart digital tools   and support s the ecological transition of the European cloud industry  and reduce energy  consumption of AI ; and   • it promotes free access to ecological data . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       47 PE 662.906  France provides  €1.5 billion to the development of artificial intelligence by the end of 2022, including  €700 million for research, w hich are about €100 – 500 million per year. There is no budget breakdown  related to the environmental applications of AI .  Italy ’s national AI strategy also has the clear o bjective that AI should support the implementation of  the S ustainable Development Goals  (Ministry of Economic Development  2019) . Priority sectors i n the  strategy are :  • environment , infrastructures and networks : AI solutions to achieve savings in the use of  resources (water, electricity and natural gas),  reduction in polluting emissions (e.g. monitoring  and intelligent management of networks and consumption),  strengthening of the circular  economy (e.g. monitoring and predictive management of the waste cycle) , better prevention  of natural disasters ;  • agri-food sector:  avoiding overproduction and waste , precision agriculture , optimisation  of  food processing, storage and transport processes ; and  • smart  cities:  intelligent parking, traffic management and control of signs, management of  lighting and optimisation  of public transport.   Italy started the initiative ‘ trust for sustainability’ which p romot es pilot projects on the issues of soci al  and environmental susta inability, in which public and private organis ations in possession of data  temporarily entrust the management to certified third parties for the pursuit of a public interest .  The Netherlands ’ AI strategy also includes a commitment  to exploiting the social and economic  opportunities of AI in domains and sectors such as agriculture and food, and the energy transition and  sustainability.  The Dutch priorities and actions are:   • Agriculture  and food : further automation, precision agriculture, and system integration , And  the development of a data infrastructure for arable farming.  The JoinData Foundation was set  up from the Smart Dairy Farming project, a non -profit cooperative that enables safe and  transparent data distribution in the food & agri culture  sector .  • Energy transition : implementation of  smart solutions to make use of the various variabl e  renewable energy sources. In the Netherlands, solutions have been developed for these types  of flexibility and congestion markets, ranging from energy source sel ection in buildings, the  role of electric cars in the energy system, fault detection in electricity networks and providing  insight into the energy networks.  The wind farms in the North Sea are  also subject to AI  approaches, such as inspections with drones,  maintenance robots and the vertical driving of  foundations.   In the Dutch version of the strategy , an annex mentions that the yearly governmental budget to AI  innovation and research is estimated at €45 million.   The German  national AI strategy includes a str ong focus  related to the topics of the EGD – both in  Germany and across the world  (Federal Government 2020) . In the OECD AI policy database , Germany  is the country with the most AI policy actions related to the  environment.  The German government wi l l  develop a concept for the environmental impact assessment  of AI and step up its funding for  research on the environmental impacts of AI, in particular commissioning the collection of empirical  data and a systematic analysis of the CO 2-saving potential of AI,  duly taking into account possible  negative effects (such as rebound effects).   The German g overnment will set up an ‘ Application Lab for AI and Big Data ’ with the aim of developing  data -based applications to attain the Sustainable Development Goals.  German y also plans to provide 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  48  a cloud for environmental data to ensure that valid access to this data is available to scientists,  businesses and society in a transparent way, and to enable the development of sustainable AI  applications .  The Federal Government ha s initiated several  research projects on AI i n agriculture . These include  digital trial fields in agriculture, which show how digital and AI technologies can be optimally deployed  to protect the environment, improve animal welfare and biodiversity, and fac ilitate work. The Federal  Government also  plans to provide funding for the establishment of an application hub in the fiel d of  recycling and the circular economy . The aim and objective of the hub’s research and development  work is to use AI -supported recyc ling-friendly product design, smart sensors and tracking technologies  for collection, sorting and recycling to increase the use of recyclates, to use plastics longer and more  efficiently and to avoid plastic being released into the environment.   To enable t he administration to use AI in a legally compliant way quickly and to effectively support the  goal of ‘sustainable AI ’ as an important component of sustainable digitalisation, environmental law is  being examined to see whether modifications might make sens e. Germany has also started a  cooperation with France in bilateral AI clusters focusing on specific industries (e.g. healthcare,  environment, robotics, mobility).   Germany is the only Member State to  published data on specific funding activities related to AI and  environmental solutions . Germany will fund AI applications to benefit the environment and the  climate and will develop assessment principles for this. The goal is to initiate 50 flagship applications   in this field. Funding: €3 billion in period 2019- 2025 . The f unding initiative AI Flagship Projects   focussing on funding AI innovations for climate protection and the resource efficiency of AI  applications  started in 2019 with a volume of €27 million. 13 projects are currently funded under the  title ‘KI for the environment” and 13 projects in the area of ‘application, scaling and capacity building’.   While the se national AI strategies were  triggered as part of the EU’s coordinated plan on AI to avoi d  fragmentation and become more powerful, it is striking that some national AI strategies lac k a  European dimension and only outline how the country itself intends to become an  AI leader , without   provid ing links to the many relevant EU policy activities . This may be partly  due to the fact that many  EU policy initiatives have been released recently and national AI strategies may have been developed  before . The perspective that E uropean cooperation is essential to  be a global player with influence on  AI development and impl ementation is sometimes missing  in the strategies . However, some strategies  strongly build on the EU’s activities and priorities and have been prepared in the spirit of European  cooperation.     
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       49 PE 662.906  5.  RECOMMENDA TIONS   AI systems and applications have  a broad  range of significant potential  to support a socio -ecolo gical  transformation , their deployment can  also result in  serious and far -reaching environmental  risks.  Environmental policy  and regulation  in principle  have a broad spectrum of instruments at their  disposal  to enable the development of technologies and innovations in a goal -oriented manner, as well as to  protect and take precautions against specific sustainability risks.   5.1. Strengthen  research on AI systems and their applications fo r the  goals of the European Green Deal   The EU has already set the right priorities in its new EU Multiannual Financial Framework for 2021 -2027  to strengthen digital capacity through the Digital Europe Programme (DEP), th e Connecting Europe  Facility (CEF2), Horizon Europe , and the Space Programme. In particular Horizon Europe includes key  research program mes on AI in relevant sectors linked to environmental objectives . The DEP  is focused  on more general strategic areas and it is less c lear to what extent it will benefit AI applications in all  areas of the EGD with testing and exper imentation facilities or data spaces  Thus, further  implementation  should ensure that this focus  is fully reflected. It will be important  to ensure  coordination among the four key EU research program mes for an effective  funding across all the  diverse topics of the EGD.   The research agenda in the 202 1-2027 period must  play a key role in advancing research on how AI c an  make ICTs  more energy -efficient , using  demonstration projects related to energy -efficient data centre s  to achieve the EU’s target  of climate -neutral, highly energy -efficient and sustainable data centre s by  no later than 2030.   Without control and steering, there is the risk that AI -based research and consequently  t ech no logies   with potential to achieve certain sustainable development goals may not be prioriti sed, if their  expected economic impact is not high. As the study showed,  there are many options for AI soluti ons  to benefit the objectives of the EGD . While  in some  areas it will be difficult to incorporate A I s o lu t ions  into business models (e.g. related to the protection of biodiversity, nature conservation, environmental  mon itoring activities ), in others where such business models already exist these will not automatically  contribute only positively to achieving environmental objectives (e.g. precision agriculture). It is  therefore important that EU research program mes provide resources for work on those  potenti al  applications in environmental areas that may be more difficult to turn into business cases and that may  not be undertaken without public funding. This is particularly relevant for AI applications for  environme ntal monitoring or for the enforcement of environmental law.    The EGD requires transformative changes in several sectors which have been outlined in the EU  strategies. Research on AI methods to enhance the EGD objectives should particularly address the areas  where such transformative changes are required.  It is also important that research activities deliver replicable AI solutions to cater for t he needs of the  public sector and local governments related to  AI and the topics of the European Green Deal . Many  local governments in the EU will n either be in a situation where  they can afford to procure  A I s o lu t ions  on environmental issues, nor will they have strong staff capacities in this area t o plan for the design of  such AI solutions.  This should also be taken into account in the EU research program mes in the period  2021- 2027.   To use the potential of AI for earth observation  on environment -related issues it is necessary to  strengthen capacities of researchers in the EU that are familiar with both AI and earth observation , to 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  50  provide clean quality -controlled  training datasets, easy access to observation  data and the  development of further use cases and prototype applications.   5.2. Develop , promote and implement methodologies for environmental  impact assessments of AI technologies   As an approach to operationali sing the various initiatives to establish and apply ethical values and  norms for AI applications , the EU should promote or require new AI systems to u n der go  im pact   assessments that sufficiently cover  environmental sustainability  criteria prior to their large -scale use.  Such assessments should go beyond the direct environmental impact of the AI system itself (raw  materials, energy use) and cover also i ndirect impacts of the use and operation of the AI  application .  While these impacts will be more difficult to assess, respective methodologies could draw  upon  the  family of approaches of policy impact assessments , sustainability impact assessments  or strat egic  environmental assessments . Such assessments would increase transparency on the functioning and  environmental impacts of AI systems . They  would also help  build experience with the possibilities,  limitations and practical implementation of such assessments. Both  transparency on the functioni ng  and impacts as well as methodological experience  are important aspects of  an ecological  regulatory  framework for AI systems.   To ensure that AI systems developed by the private sector adhere to sustainable d evelopment  principles, audit and certification mechanisms for AI systems could be developed covering the direct  environmental footprint of their development and operation  and the environmental, social and human  rights impacts of their functionality and app lication (through the triggered changes in behavio ur of  individuals, production units and processes, logistics, companies, etc.). Such certification schemes   could , in a second step , also be used to facilitate the  integrat ion of sustainable development goals in  public procurement  processes of large -scale AI systems and applications .  5.3. Further monitoring and evaluation of trends required    The EU should promote projects and initiatives that monitor and collect the current AI activitie s in the  EGD priority areas in a more systematic way and assess and evaluate the environmental, social, legal  and ethical implications. The initial findings in this study show that for key areas for greenhouse gas   mitigation we did  not find any examples of  AI applications, such as to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions  from livestock which is the largest emission source in agriculture. It would be important to evaluate  such gaps in a more systematic way than has been possible in this study.   Based on such systematic evaluation, gaps could be filled through EU research programmes and very  promising AI applications could be further promoted. For example, t he EU could establish more specific  objectives related to the use of promising AI applications for the EG D priority areas , in a similar way as  Hungary in its national strategy. An example would be to set an objective date by when a certain share  of the EU electricity grid should be managed by AI technologies to integrate flexible renewable energy  supply and d emand and storage options , which is a key future requirement for a carbon -neutral  Europe.   Many of the AI applications that support the EGD targets enhance the efficiency of existing systems or  practices such as electricity grids, fer tilisation , or transpo rt management. Transformational changes  needed to achieve the objectives of the EGD cannot be extrapolated from the past. M achine learning  trained on large amount of historic data thus may not be able to forecast necessary transformational  changes and may prefer systems and stages that we currently seek to overcome. Much more 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       51 PE 662.906  sophisticated technologies than machine learning would be necessary to re spond to  the current  challenge.   AI systems are  unevenly distributed between sta keholders in sectors or between countries. F or  instance, complex AI -enhanced agricultural equipment may not be accessible to small farmers and  thus produce an increased gap in its use with respect to larger producers . This could enhance the  existing social  impacts on smaller farms in the EU or increase uneven distribution effects between richer  and poorer countries  and could further support the growth of particularly large farms and thei r  business model on large scale monocultures including their detrimenta l environmental effects .  5.4. Empower  transformative systems and applications  in digital markets   The purpose for which AI systems are developed and utili sed is critical to foreseeing  whether they will  make their decisions in accordance with environmental goals.  It is thus plausible that sustainabl e  policies  focus on  capacitat ing stakeholders of (environmental)  public interest  who  develop and appl y   AI systems in line with sustainability goals.  It also makes sense to provide  private sector actors with   incentives to develop AI applications which are designed to achieve environmental goals.  Su ch  in direct   strategies of environmental regulation  can be put forward  in a number of ways .  Incentives for developing and operating sustainable AI -applications could  be created by  further   aligning funding  policies with sustainability goals and respective taxonomies or by means of ‘ green ’  adjustments of public procurement. Further development of ‘ green ’ procurement policies could  create  additional incentives for the  development and use of promising AI applications, e.g. for sustainable  supply chain management and trustworthy certification .  Economies of scale or vendor  lock -in effects can make it difficult for sustainable applications to  compete against commercial provid ers. For AI  applications with particular potential for the  environment, consideration should therefore also be given to prioriti sing the development and  operation of certain applications by public actors.   5.5. Explore, d evelop  and promote  a European model of the data  economy harness ing data as a resource for sustainable AI   Related to environmental issues , it is essential to support open access to relevant data and initiati ves  working to enlarge the open data sets.  This allows  thematic field s to be covered  that do not necessarily  present an easy business case and the inclusion of neglected geographical regions and countries . As  the World Development Report  (World Bank 2021)  states: “ a global consensus is needed to ensure that  data are safeguarded as a global public good and as a resource to achieve equitable and sustainable  development .” The ‘Common Europe Green Deal Data Space’ to support the Green Deal priority actions  on climate change, circular economy, zero -pollution, biodiversity, defore station and complianc e  assurance and the start of the ‘GreenData4All’ initiative  as part of the EU data strategy are important  steps in this direction.   In relation  to AI , access to relevant, high -quality , labelled and structured environmental data, both to   train algorithms and to use as input data, will  be instrumental to the development of AI applications   relevant for achieving the EG D. New mechanisms for sharing relevant datasets will need to be tested   and developed , and efforts are needed to ensure high -quality data labelling. Large scale, open source  data resources are one option which could be explored further as a  mechanism for providing the high quality data required to develop specific AI systems. The b road  development of AI applications for  environm ental purposes will strongly depend on the sharing of data and on access to data which has  to be organised , regulated  and financed . It is important to provide funding within the EU’s r es earch  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  52  programmes (Horizon Europe, Digital Europe Programme) for the pr eparation of such structured  environmental datasets .  The European Data Strategy and the draft Data Governance Regulation emphasise the importanc e to   ensure better access to data. However, emphasis is often placed on improving the conditions for the  (voluntary) sharing of data between companies as well as on individual ‘ data donations ’, and on the  widest possible access to public databases ( ‘open data ’). Strong legal protection of privately  held data,  e.g. as trade secrets, may be an obstacle to many use cases of AI for environmental governance and  administration . A European legal act announced for 2021 will also include an assessment of the   intellectua l property right s framework , with a view to further improving data access and use . Different  use cases of data for environmental goals should be considered as well.   The way in which access to data is organi sed – i.e. how data is shared and how authority and control  over data is allocated – is fundamental for the design of AI  systems and the outcomes of AI  decisions.   Recent proposals and debates about democratic data governance or representative data rights m ight   indicate legal and organisation al pathways fo r data allocation , which  reflect principles of sustainability   Trustworthy  procedures and a clear allocation of citizen ’s rights to control the use of data  could also   facili tate applications directed towards socio -ecological goals . Data  regulation can create incentives to  share or generate high -quality  data. In this context, for example, the introduction  of registered ‘data  altruis m organisations ’ under the recently proposed European Data Governance Regulation  may  harness potential for the EGD.   5.6. More Member States  should integrate the European strategy in to  their national AI strategies   While national AI strategies have been triggered as part of the EU’s coordinated plan on AI to avoid  fragmentation and become more powerful, it is striking  that only six Member States have included a  stronger focus on AI applications for the targets of the EGD. The coordinated plan will not achieve the  relevant impacts if Member States do not follow the Commission in these priorities. S ome Member  States ’ nati onal AI strategies do not sufficiently reflect EU policy initiatives and EU cooperation  and  further efforts are needed to implement enhanced cooperation in the EU  related to AI.   Despite the proposed  ‘Common Europe Green Deal Data Space’ in the data strateg y, Member States  also identified such priority data spaces and datasets which they plan to provide for businesses,  researchers and the public. Despite the efforts of the EU’s coordinated plan on AI, the analysis of  Member States ’ strategies indicates  that further coordination on such data spaces is needed in order  to avoid a scattered and fragmented situation with a large number of data spaces , but few relevant  data  in these spaces .   5.7. Push the EU agenda for AI to support environmental sustainability at   the global level  Since most international initiatives on  AI do not focus on environmental use cases, discuss and anal y se  environmental risks or develop policy recommendations to safeguard environmental objectives in the  use of AI , the EU could fill this g ap. It could do so  by joining, strengthen ing and at the same time  broadening  the UNEP’s AI for the  Planet initiative or the Coalition for Digital Environmental  Sustainability (CODES)  or by starting an own international initiative . Ano ther approach could be  to get  involved through suitable agents in initiatives like the AI partnership or the AI for Good i nitiative to  ensure that these increasingly integrate environmental goals . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       53 PE 662.906  Developing countries must also be supported in  build ing the necessary capacities within research,  business, government and civil society to participate in and benefit from the further development of  AI for tackling environmental problems. D eveloping and emerging economies successfully combatting  the drivers of the deterioration of glob al environmental goods like biodiversity or climate is becoming  increasingly vital . Hence , it is crucial that the potential of AI is  accessible  to these countries. However,  there are still major obstacles to  doing so, such as the  insufficient availability of local data , access to  relevant data, a limited skills base , limited attractiv eness  for respective business models or limited  capacities within governments to promote and to regulate AI development and use .    
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  54  REFERENCES    • Abel, D., Williams, E. C., Brawner, S., Reif, E., Littman, M., L., Bandit -based solar panel control , In Thirty Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018 . Available at:  https://david abel.github.io/papers/iaai_solar_bandit.pdf .  • AI4EO, 2021, websit e. Available at:  https://ai4eo.eu/ .  • AI for Earth, 2021,  website. Available at:  https://www.microsoft.com/de -de/ai/ai -for-earth .   • AI Repository, website. Available at:  https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -T/AI/Pages/ai -repository.aspx .   • AI-Commons, A common knowledge hub t o accelerate the world’s challenges with Artificial  Intelligence, 2021. Website available at:  https://ai -commons.org/  an AI For The Planet,  website  available at:  https://ai fortheplanet.org/ .   • Ali, A.M., Söffker D., Towards optimal power management of hybrid electric vehicles in real -time: A  review on methods, challenges, and state- of-the-art solutions . Energies, 11(3), 2018.   • Ali, T. H et. al., Application of Artifical Intelligence in Construction Waste Management . In: 2019 8th  International Conference on Industrial Technology and Management (ICITM). 2019 8th  International Conference on Industrial Technology and Management (ICITM), S. 50 –55,  2019.   • Amasheva, I., The Poten tial of RegTech in Improving the Effectiveness of Environmental Regulation,   Barberis et. al. (eds.), The RegTech Book, 2019 . Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119362197.ch51 .   • Andrae A.S.G., Hypotheses for primary energy use, electricity use and CO2 emissions of global  computing and its shares of the total between 2020 and 2030.  WSEAS TRANSACTIONS on POWER  SYSTEMS, 2020b, DOI: 10.37394/232016.2020.15.6 .  • Andrae A.S.G.,  New perspectives on internet electricity use in 2030 . Engineering and  Applied Science  Letters 2020a .  • Awad, E. et al., Crowdsourcing Moral Machines , Communications of the ACM, Vol. 63, No. 3, 202 0,  pp. 48 -55. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1145/3339904 .   • AWS, Transforming exploration and production with AWS Machine Learning , Solution Brief, 2021.  Available at: https://d1.awsstatic.com/Industries/Oil/AWS_Oil_Gas_Solution_Brief_FINAL.pdf .   • Belkhir, L. Elmeligi, A. , Assessing ICT global emissions footprint: Trends to 2040 & r ecommendations.   Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 177, 2018, pp. 448–463. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.239 .  • Biermann, L. et al. Finding Plastic Patches in  Coastal Waters using Optical Satellite Data, Sci Rep 10,  5364 2020. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 020- 62298- z.   • Bieser, J. C. T., Hilty, L. M., Assessing Indirect Environmental Effects of Information and Communication  Technology (ICT):A Systematic Literature Review , Sustainability, 2018 . Available at:   https://doi.org/10.3390/su10082662 .   • Blue River Technology & John Deere, Delive ring Impactful Solutions , 2021. Available at:   https://bluerivertechnology.com/our -products/ .   • Bluefield, Independent ESG data via satellites and AI, 2021. Available at:  https://bluefield.co/ . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       55 PE 662.906  • BMI, Gutachten der Datenethikkommission , 2019. Available at:    https://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/downloads/DE/publikationen/themen/it digitalpolitik/gutachten -datenethikkommission.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=6 .   • BMU, Our support programme for artificial intelligence , 2021. Available at:   https://www.bmu.de/en/topics/europe -international -sustainability -digitalisation/digitalisation and -the-environment/our -support -programme -for-artificial -intelligence/ .   • BMW, Computer -Assisted Art - The Fascination of AI Design , 2021. Available at:   https://www.bmw.com/en/design/ai -design -and-digital -art.html .   • Böcker, T.  et al ., An economic and environmental assessment of a glyphosate ban for the example of  maize production , European Review of Agricultural Economics, 2019 . Available at:   https://academic.oup.com/erae/article/47/2/371/5306573 .   • Bonnefon, J., The social dilemma of autonomous vehicles , Science, Vol. 352, No. 6293, 2016. Availabl e  at: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/352/6293/1573 .   • Böttcher, H. et al., Exploratory Analysis  of an EU Sink and Restoration Target , 2021. Available at:   https://www.oeko.de/fileadmin/oekodoc/GP -Sink -Target.pdf .   • Calvo, R. et al ., Advancing impact assessment for intelligent systems , Nature Machine Intelligence  2(2):1- 3, 2020.   • Carlson, A.; Sakao, T., Environmental assessment of consequences from predictive maintenance with  artificial intelligence techniques: Importance of the system boundary , Procedia CIRP, Volume 90, 2020,  pp. 171- 175.   • Carlsson, F. et al., Nudging as an Environmental Polic y Instrument , (Online) Working Paper i n  Economics, No. 756, 2019. Available at: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/196185119.pdf .   • Castilla -Rubio  et al.  ., Fintech and sustainable development asses sing the implications, UNEP Inquiry  into the Design of a Sustainable Financial System, 2016 . Available at:   https://www.unep.org/es/node/14970 .   • Chou, J .-S., Tran, D.- S., Forecasting energy consumption time  series using machine learning techniques  based on usage patterns of residential householders , Energy, Volume 165, Part B, 2018, pp. 709- 726.   • Christen, M.  et al ., Wenn Algorithmen für uns entscheiden: Chancen und Risiken der künstlichen  Intelligenz, in TA -SWISS Publikationsreihe (Hrsg.): TA 72/2020. Zürich: vdf, 2020. Available at:   https://vdf.ch/wenn -algorithmen -fur-uns-ents cheiden -chancen -und -risiken -der-kunstlichen intelligenz -e-book.html .   • Çınar, M.  et al. , Machine Learning in Predictive Maintenance towards  Sustainable Smart Manufacturing  in Industry 4.0 , Sustainability 2020,12, 8211.   • Circella, G. et al., Keeping Vehicle U se and Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Check in a Driverless Vehicle  World , UC Davis, 2017. Available at:  https://3rev.ucdavis .edu/policy -brief/keeping -vehicle -use-andgreenhouse- gas-emissions -check -driverless -vehicle -world .   • Climate Change AI, 2021. Available at: https://www.climatechange.ai/ .  • Cloud Agronomics, Our Solutions Tackle the biggest challenges in sustainable agriculture, 2021.  Available at:  https://www.cloudagronomics.com/solutions .  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  56  • Couldry, N.,  Powell, A., Big Data from the bottom up , Big Data & Society, 1(2), 20 14. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951714539277 .   • Curioni, A., IBM Project Debater demonstrates the future of democracy in Switzerland , 2019. Availabl e  at:  https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2019/09/speech -by-crowd -switzerland/ .   • Dale, B. -E., Uglane, V., Artificial Intelligence in the oil and gas production , 2018. Available at:  https://www.geoexpro.com/articles/2018/08/artificial -intelligence -in-oil-gas-production .  • Danish Government, National strategy for Artificial Intelligence , 2019. Available at:   https://en.digst.dk/media/19337/305755_gb_version_final -a.pdf .   • Darko, A. et al., Artificial intelligence in the AEC industry: Scientometric analysis a nd visualization of  research activities . In: Automation in Construction 112, 2020.   • Deatherage, P., Environmental Compliance Through Regulation Technology , The Journal of  International Relations, Peace Studies, and Development, Vol. 6: Iss. 1, Article 4., 2021. Available at:   https://scholarworks.arcadia.edu/agsjournal/vol6/iss1/4 .  • Degot, C.  et al ., Reduce Carbon and Costs with the Power of AI , Boston Consulting Group (BCG)  publication, 2021. Available at:  https://www.bcg.com/publications/2021/ai -to-reduce -carbon emissions .  • Dilkina, B. et al., Method for designing the layout of turbines in a windfarm , US Pa tent 9, 189, 570, 2015.  Available at:  https://patents.google.com/patent/US20110208483A1/en .   • DIN/DKE, Normungsroadmap Künstliche Intelligenz , 2020. Available at:    https://www.din.de/resource/blob/772438/6b5ac6680543eff9fe372603514be3e6/normungsroad map -ki-data.pdf .   • Djenouri, D. et al., Machine Learning for Smart Building Applications . In: ACM Comput. Surv. 52 (2),  pp. 1 –36, 2019.   • Donti, P., How machine learning can help tackle climate change , Crossroads, the ACM Magazi ne f or  Students, 2020. Available at:  https://doi.org/10.1145/3433142 .   • Ellen MacArthur Foundation, Artificial intelligence and the circular economy - AI as a tool to accelerate  the transition , 2019. Available at:  http://www. ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications .  • Enerdata, Disruptive changes, but rather difficult to establish market projections , 2018, Executive Brief .  Available at:  https://www.enerdata.net/publications/executive -briefing/world -energy consumption -from -digitalization.pdf .  • ESA, Towards a European Artificial intelligence for Earth Observation (AI4EO) R&I Agenda, 2018.  Available at:  https://eo4society.esa.int/2018/09/19/towards -a-european -artificial -intelligence -forearth -observation -ai4eo -ri-agenda/ .   • Europea n Agency for fundamental rights, Data quality and artificial intelligence – mitigating bias and  error to protect fundamental rights , 2019. Available at:   https://fra.europa.eu/en/publication/2019/data -quality -and-artificial -intelligence -mitigating -biasand -error- protect .   • European Commission, ACCMET Accelerated Metallurgy - the accelerated discovery of alloy  formulations using combinatorial principles , 2017, Final Report Summary . Available at:   file:///C:/Users/A31E3~1.HER/AppData/Local/Temp/CORDIS_project_263206_en.pdf . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       57 PE 662.906  • European Commissi on, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the  Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – A European  strategy for data , 2020c, COM(2020) 66 final . Available at:    https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/communication -european -strategy -data19feb2020_en.pdf .  • European Commission, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the  European Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of  the Regions – Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence , 2018. Available at:  https://eur lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM:2018:795:FIN .   • European Commission, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the  European Council, the Council, the European Economic an d Social Committee and the Committee of  the Regions – Stepping up Europe’s 2030 climate ambition Investing in a climate -neutral future for the  benefit of our people , 2020e, COM(2020)562 final . Available at:  https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020DC0562&from=EN .   • European Commission, European enterprise survey on the use of technologies based on artificial  intelligence , Final report prepared for DG Communications Networks, Content & Technology by  Ipsos Belgium and International Center for Innovation, technology and Education (iCite), 2020d .  Available at: https://digital -strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/european -enterprise -survey -usetechnologies -based -artificial -intelligence .   • European Commission, Horizon Europe – Strategic Plan 2021- 2024, 2021b . Available at:   https://op.europa.eu/en/web/eu -law- and-publications/publication -detail/ -/publication/3c6ffd74 8ac3 -11eb -b85c -01aa75ed71a1 .  • European Commission, Horizon Europe – The EU Research & Innovation Programme 2021 -2027 ,  2021a . Available at:   https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/research_and_innovation/funding/presentations/ec_rtd _he-investing -to-shape -our-future.pdf .  • European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on  European data governance (Data Governance Act ), 2020f , COM/2020/767 final . Available at:     https://eur -lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52020PC0767&from=EN .   • European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on  Laying down harmonized rules on Artificial Intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act) , 2021c, COM(2021)  206 final, 21.4.2021. Available at:  https://digital -strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/proposal regulation -laying -down -harmonised -rules-artificial -intelligence -artificial -intelligence .   • European Commission, Shaping Europe’s Digital Future . 2020a . Available at:    https:/ /ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/communication -shaping -europes -digital -future feb2020_en_4.pdf .  • European Commission, The Energy performance of buildings directive factsheet , 2019 Available at:   https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/buildings_performance_factsheet.pdf .  • European Commission, White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – a European approach to excellence and  trust , 2020b, COM(2020) 65 final . Available at:    https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/commission -white -paper -artificial -intelligence feb2020_en .pdf . 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  58  • European Environment Agency (EEA), Annual European Union greenhouse gas inventory 1990 -2018  and inventory report 2020. Submission to the UNFCCC Secretariat, 2020 . Available at:   https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/european -union -greenhouse- gas-inventory -2020 .  • European Parliament and Council, Regulation (EU) 2020/852 of 18 June 2020 on the establishment of  a framework to facilitate sustainable investme nt, and amending Regulation (EU) 2019/2088, 2020 .  Available at:  https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2020/852/oj .   • European Parliament, Answer given by Mr Bretonon behalf of the European Commission , 9.2.2021, E 006526/2020. Available at:  https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/E -9-2020- 006526 ASW_EN.pdf .  • Fang, F. et al., PAWS: Game Theory Based Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security , 2017, in:  Conservation Criminology, pp.179 -195. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net /  publication/319444748_PAWS_Game_Theory_Based_Protection_Assistant_for_Wildlife_Security .  • FAO, Artificial Intelligence best -practices in agriculture can help bridge the digital divide while tackling  food insecurity , 2020. Available at:   http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/1309630/icode/ .  • Farley, S. et al., Situating Ecology as a Big ‐Data Science: Current Advances, Challenges, and Solutions ,  BioScience, 2018, 68(8), pp. 563–576. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biy068 .   • Fasal, Company homepage , 2021. Available at:  https://fasal.co/ .  • Feng, D. et al ., Advances in plant nutrition diagnosis based on remote sensing and computer  application , Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 32, no. 22, 2020, pp. 16833–16842. Availabl e  at: https://link.springer.com/co ntent/pdf/10.1007/s00521- 018- 3932- 0.pdf .  • Fezer, K. H., Repräsentatives Dateneigentum, Ein zivilgesellschaftliches Bürgerrecht , Konrad Adenauer -Stiftung, 2018. Available at:  https://www.kas.de/de/einzeltitel/ /content/repraesentatives -dateneigentum .  • Finger, R.  et al ., Precision Farming at the Nexus of Agricultural Production and the Environment , 2019,  Annual Review of Resource Economics, 11(1), pp. 313- 335.   • Font, X. et al., Sustainability and marketing in tourism: its contexts, paradoxes, approaches, challenges  and potential , Journal of Sustainable Tourism, Vol. 25, No. 7, pp. 869 -828, 2017. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2017.1301721 .   • Frank, B., Artificial intelligence -enabled environmental sustainability of products: Marketing benefits  and their variation by con sumer, location, and product types ; 285, 2021. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125242 .  • Frey, U.  et al., Self -reinforcing electricity price dynamics under the variable market  premium scheme,  Submitted to Energies, Section: Energy Economics and Policy, Special Issue: Uncertainties and Risk  Management in Competitive Energy Markets , 2020.   • FUDIPO, Biological Waste -Water Treatment Plants (ABB), 2021. Available at:   https://fudipo.eu/biological -waste -water -treatment -plants/ .  • G20, Ministerial Statement on Trade and Digital Economy , 2019. Available at:   https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000486596.pdf .  • García -Martín, E  et al.,  Estimation of energy consumption in machine learning . Journal of Parallel and  Distributed Computing, Vol. 134, 2019, pp. 75–88. doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2019.07.007 . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       59 PE 662.906  • Gates, M., Ma, J., The age of digital interdependence, Report of the UN Secretary -General’s High -level  Panel on Digital Cooperation , 2019. Available at:  https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation report -for%20web.pdf .   • Gebauer, Jochen, Roboter als Klimaschützer , Zeitschrift für Umweltrecht 2019, Vol.  10, p. 513- 514.   • Gesing, B.  et al. , Artificial intelligence in logistics – a collaborative report by DHL and IBM on  implications and use cases for the logistics industry . DHL Customer Solutions & Innovation, 201 8 .  Available at:  https://irp -cdn.multiscreensite.com/c159673b/files/uploaded/glo -ai-in-logistics white -paper.pdf .  • Gillham, J., How AI can enable a Sustainable Future , Report by PwC and Micr osoft , 2020. Available at:   https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340386931_How_AI_can_enable_a_Sustainable_Future .  • Greenpeace, Oil in the cloud – How Tech companies are helping big oil profit from climate destruction ,  2020. Available at:  https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/oil -in-the-cloud/ .   • Griffin, M., General Motors star ts using AI to design its future cars , 2021. Available at:  https://www.fanaticalfuturist.com/2019/10/general -motors -starts -using -ai-to-design -its-future -cars.  • Gröger, J.  et al., Entwicklung und Anwendung von Bewertungsgrundlagen für ressourceneffiziente  Software unter Berücksichtigung bestehender Methodik (Development and application of evaluation  principles for resource -efficient software taking into account existing methodology ). German  Environment Agency (UBA) , 2018.   • Hammond, P. et al., Detection of untreated sewage discharges to watercourses using machine learning,  Clean Water, 4 (18), 2021. Available at:  https://www.nature.com/articles/s41545 -021- 00108- 3.  • Hansjürgens, B. et al., Neglected Values of Major Water Engineering Projects: Ecosystem Services, Social  Impacts, and Economic Valuation , Society - Water - Technology, W ater Resources Development and  Management, 2007, pp.69- 71. Available at:  https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-319- 18971- 0_5.  • Hanslik, L., Individual Discounts applied to anonymous customers , Segment of O ne, 2018. A v a ilable  at: https://www.so1.ai/blog/optimized -anonymous -discounts/ .   • Hastings, M., AI for enhanced wind -turbine monitoring , Wind Systems, 2020 . Available at:   https://www.windsystemsmag.com/ai -for-enhanced -wind -turbine -monitoring/ .  • Hedberg, A., Šipka, S., Improving biodiversity: How can digitalisation help? , Discussion Paper -  Sustainable Prosperity for Europe Programme, European Policy Center, 2020 . Available at:   https://www.epc.eu/en/publications/Improving -biodiversity -How -can-digitalisation help~38bd64 .   • HelioPas AI, WaterFox feldgenau bewässern , 2021. Available at:  https://waterfox.heliopas.ai/ .  • High -Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence, A definition of AI: Main ca pabilities and scientific  disciplines , European Commission 2019.   • Hilty, L.  et al., Green Software: Establishing and exploiting potentials for environmental protection in  information and communication technology (Green IT) . Subproject 3: Analysis of potenti als  for   optimizing software development and deployment for resource conservation. German  Environment Agency (UBA) 2015.   • Hilty, L.  M. et al. ,Kriterienkatalog für nachhaltige Software (criteria catalogue for sustainable software).  Öko -Institut e.V. 2017.  
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  60  • Himeur, Y.  et al., Artificial intelligence based anomaly detection of energy consumption in buildings: A   review, current trends and new perspectives . In: Applied Energy 2021, 287, S. 116601. DO I:  10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116601 .   • Hülsmann, F. et al., share – wissenschaftliche Begleitforschung zu car2go mit batterieelektrischen und  konventionellen Fahrzeugen , Öko -Institut, isoe, aproxima Gesellschaft f ür Markt - und  Sozialforschung, car2go, 2018. Available at: https://www.oeko.de/fileadmin/oekodoc/share Wissenschaftliche -Begleitforschung -zu-car2go -mit-batterieelektrischen -und -konventionellenFahrzeugen.pdf .  • Hummel, P., Own Data? Ethical Reflections on Data Ownership , Philos. Technol., 2020. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347- 020- 00404- 9.  • IEA, Data Centres and Data Transmission Networks, Tracking report , 2020. Available at:   https://www.iea .org/reports/data -centres -and -data- transmission -networks .  • Ilichev, V. , What do artificial intelligence and machine learning have to offer car sharing , 2018.  Available at:  https://medium.com/driving -to-the-future/what -do-artificial -intelligence -andmachine -learning -have -to-offer -car-sharing -be9fdaa425dd .  • Imec, Imex and TNO launch Digital Twin of the city of Antw erp, press release, 2018 . Available at:   https://www.imec -int.com/en/articles/imec- and-tno-launch -digital -twin -of-the-city-of-antwerp .   • ITU, AI for Good, Global Impact,  ITU News Magazine, No 2, 2020a . Available at:   https://www.itu.int/en/itunews/Documents/2020/2020- 02/2020_ITUNews02- en.pdf .  • ITU, AI repository,  2021. Available at:  https://www.itu.int/en/ITU -T/AI/Pages/ai -repository.aspx .  • ITU, ITU -T L.1470(01/2020) , Greenhouse gas emissions trajectories for the information and  communication technology sector compatible with the UNFCCC Paris Agreement , 2020b . Available at:   https://www.itu.int/ITU -T/recommendations/rec.aspx?rec=14084 .  • Jabamony, J., Shanmugavel, G. R., IoT Based Bus Arrival Time Prediction Using Artificial Neural Network  (ANN) for Smart Public Transport System (SPTS), International Journal of Intelligent Engineering &  Systems, Vol. 13, No. I 2020. Available at:  http://oaji.net/articles/2019/3603- 1577092499.pdf .  • Janssen, M. et al., Data governance: Organizing data for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence, Government  Information Quarterly , 2020. Availab le at:    https://repositorio.inesctec.pt/bitstream/123456789/11779/1/P -00S-BP7.pdf .  • Jovanovic, B ., Rousseau, P . L., General Purpose Technologies," Handbook of Economic  Growt h, in:  Philippe Aghion & Steven Durlauf (ed.), Handbook of Economic Growth, edition 1, volume 1,  chapter 18, pages 1181- 1224, Elsevier, 2005.   • JRC, The European Programme for Energy Efficiency in Data Centres: The Code of Conduct,  2019.  Available at:    http://www.energycoalition.eu/sites/default/files/20190904_CoC%20Sept%202019_Paolo%20Be rtoldi.pdf .  • Jung, J.  et al. , The potential of remote sensing and artificial intelligence as tools to improve the resilience  of agriculture production systems , Current Opinion in Biotechnology  70 pp. 15 -22, 2021.   • Kaack, L  et al.,  Truck traffic monitoring with satellite images , Deep AI, 2019. Available at:   https://arxiv.org/pdf/1907.07660v1.pdf . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       61 PE 662.906  • Kenkmann, T.; Braungardt, S., How to make energy efficiency policies in buildings deliver? – The role of  refurbishment companies and skilled craft workers , 2018. Av ailable at: https://energy evaluation.org/wp -content/uploads/2019/06/2018- braungardt -paper -vienna.pdf .  • Kern, E  et al.,  Sustainable software products — towards assessment criteria for resource and energy  efficiency . Fut. Gener. Comput. Syst. Vol. 86, 2018, pp. 99–210.   • Kim, H. et al., Analysis of an energy efficient building design through data mining approach, In:  Automation in Construction 20 (1), pp. 3 7–43, 2011.   • König, P . D., Dissecting the Algorithmic Leviathan: On the Socio -Political Anatomy of Algorithmic  Governance , Philosophy  & Technology 2020, Vol. 33 issue 3, pp. 467 – 485.   • Koroteev, D., Tekic, Z ., Artificial intelligence in oil and gas upstream: Trends, challenges, and scenarios  for the future , Energy & AI 3, 2021. Available at:  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyai.2020.100041 .  • Koubarakis, M., ExtremeEarth - From Copernicus Big Data to Extreme Earth Analytics , 2019. Availabl e  at: http://earthanalytics.eu/about.html .   • Koubarakis, M., Virtual observatory infrastructure for earth observation data, 2020,  https://cordis.europa.eu/docs/projects/cnect/2/257662/080/p ublishing/readmore/TELEIOS Overview -Presentation.pdf .  • Lakshmi, V., Corbett, J., How Artificial Intelligence improves agricultural productivity and sustainability:  A Global Thematic Analysis, Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System  Sciences, 2020. Available at:    https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/bitstream/10125/64381/0514.pdf .  • Lee, H.  et al ., Taxi time prediction at Charlotte airport using fast -time simulation and machine learning  techniques , In 15th AIAA Aviation Technology, 2015. Available at:   https://arc.aiaa.org/doi/pdf/10.2514/6.2015- 2272 .  • Lessig, L ., Code is Law. On liberty in  cyberspace, Harvard Magazine, January -Februay, 2000.   • Lezoche, M.  et al., Agri -food 4.0: A survey of the supply chains and technologies for the future  agriculture , Computers in Industry, 2020, pp. 117:103187. Available at:  https://hal.archives ouvertes.fr/hal -02395411/document .  • Liu, R.  et al., Impacts of the digital transformation on the environment and sustainability , Öko -Institut,  issue paper under Task 3 from the “Service Contract on future EU environment policy” 2019 .  Available at:    https://ec.europa.eu/environment/enveco/resource_efficiency/pdf/studies/issue_paper_digital_t ransformation_20191220_final.pdf .  • Loose, W., Mehr Platz zum Leben – wie CarSharing Städte entlastet , 2016, Bundesverband CarSharing .  Available at:    https://carsharing.de/sites/default/files/uploads/alles_ueber_carsharing/pdf/endbericht_bcs eigenprojekt_final.pdf .  • Loughborough University,  Computer scientists develop novel artificial intelligence system that  predicts air pollution levels , 2020, news release . Available at:  https: //www.lboro.ac.uk/news events/news/2020/march/artificial -intelligence -system -air-pollution/ .  • Luccioni, A  et al., Estimating Carbon Emissions of Artificial Intelligence [Opinion].  IEEE Technology and  Society Magazine, Vol.39(2), 2020, pp. 48–51. doi:10.1109/mts.2020.2991496 . 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  62  • Masanet, E.  et al., Recalibrating global data center energy -use estimates.  Science 28 Feb 2020: Vol.  367, Issue 6481, pp. 984- 986.   • Matheson, R., Reducing the carbon fo otprint of artificial intelligence , MIT -News, 2020. Available at:   https://news.mit.edu/2020/artificial -intelligence -ai-carbon -footprint -0423.   • Mehlhart, G. et al. Technical Report accompanying the Study on the Energy Saving Potential of  Increasing Resource Efficiency , Report for the Directorate -General for Environment, Brussels, 2016.   • Mehmood, M. et al., A review of the applications of artificial intelligence and big data to buildings for  energy -efficiency and a comfortable indoor living environment . In: Energy and Buildings 202, p.  109383, 2019.   • Michalek, G.  et al., Nudging as a new 'soft' tool in environmental policy. An analysis based on insights  from cognitive and social psychology , Discussion Paper Series recap15, 2015. Available at:    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282700643_Nudging_as_a_new_%27soft%27_tool_in_ environmental_policy_An_analysis_based_on_insights_from_cognitive_and_social_psychology .  • Miller, R., Autonomous cars could drive a deluge of data center demand , 2017. Available at:   https://datacenterfrontier.com/autonomous -cars -could -drive -a-deluge -of-data -center -demand/ .   • Ministry for Innovation and Technology, Artificial Intelligence Coalition, Digital success programme,  Hungary’s Artificial Intelligence Strategy 2020 -2030, 2020, https://ati.ec.europa.eu/news/hungary has-published -its-strategy -artificial -intelligence .  • Ministry of Economic Development, Strategia Nazionale per l’Intelligenza Artificiale , 2019. Availabl e  at: https://www.mise.gov.it/images/stories/documenti/Strategia -Nazionale -Intelligenza Artificiale -Bozza -Consultazione.pdf .  • Mohan, A.  et al., Trade -offs between automation and light vehicle electrification , Nature Energy 5, 543 549 2020. Available at:  https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560 -020- 0644- 3.  • Murtagh et. al.,  Does perception of automation undermine pro-environmental behaviour? Findings  from three everyday settings , Journal of Environmental Psychology 42, 2015, pp. 139- 148.   • NETL (National Energy Technology Laboratory), AI in oil and gas production: advancing an industry  into the future , 2020. Availabl e at:  https://netl.doe.gov/node/9600 .  • Nijland, H., von Meerkerk, Jordy, Mobility and environmental impacts of car sharing in the  Netherlands. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions ; Vol 23, p. 84- 91, 2017,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2017.02.001 .  • OECD -AI-Policy Observatory, 2021, AI Principles overview . Available at:    http s://www.oecd.ai/ai -principles .  • OECD , AI Policy Observatory, Countries & initiatives overvie w. Available at:    https://oecd.ai/countries -and-initiatives .  • OECD, Measuring the digital transformation – a roadmap for the future, 2019. Available at:   https://www.oecd.org/publications/measuring -the-digital -transformation -9789264311992en.htm .   • OECD, Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence , OECD/LEGAL/0449, 2021. Available  at: https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/api/print?ids=648&lang=en .   • Open for Good 2021. Availa ble at:  https://www.openforgood.info/ .  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       63 PE 662.906  • Partnership on AI, 2021, https://www.partnershiponai.org/ .   • Paul, C.  et al.,  Rebound effects in agricultural land and soil management: Review and analytical  framework , Journal of Cleaner Production, 2019, vol. 227, pp. 1054–1067.   • Plantix 2021a, Farmers can now get immediate help on infected crops -  for free. The AI powered Plantix  turns every device turn ing Whatsapp into a powerful crop doctor , 2021. Available at:   https://plantix.net/en/blog/plant -disease -detection .  • Plantix 2021b, Integrated Pest Management. How to create unfavourable conditions for plant pests ,  2021. Available at:  https://plantix.net/en/blog/integrated -pest -management .  • President of the French Republic, AI for humanity , 2019. Available at:   https://www.aiforhumanity.fr/en/ .  • Puntrioli et al., When Technology Backfires and When It Succeeds: Positive and Negative Effects of Eco Efficient Automation on Consumers’ Choices , NA - Advances in Consumer Research Volume 47,  Association  for Consumer Research, pp.817 -818, 2019. Available at:   https://www.acrwebsite.org/volumes/2552240/volumes/v47/NA -47.   • Purdy, R., Using Earth Observation Technologies for Better R egulatory Compliance and Enforcement of  Environmental Laws , Journal of Environmental Law, 22(1), 2010, pp. 59–87. Available at:   https://doi.org/10.1093/jel/eqp027 .  • Recontext, Company Overview, 2021. Availa ble at:  https://www.reconext.com/about -us/.  • Reese, M., Leitbilder des Umweltrechts – Zur Zukunftsfähigkeit leitender Schutzkonzepte , Zeits chr ift für   Umweltrecht (ZUR) 21 (7 -8), 342, 2010. Available at:   https://www.zur.nomos.de/fileadmin/zur/doc/Aufsatz_ZUR_10_07 -08.pdf .  • Rejeski, D., When Software Rules: Rule of Law in the Age of Artificial Intelligence , 2018. Available at:   https://www.eli.org/sites/default/files/eli -pubs/when -software -rules -web.pdf .  • Ringwald, R. et. al., Smart Cities gestalten, Potenziale und Grenzen des Kommunalwirt schaftsrechts ,  BBSR, 2019. Available at:    https://www.bbsr.bund.de/BBSR/DE/veroeffentlichungen/sonderveroeffentlichungen/2019/smar t-cities -kommunalwirtschaftsrecht.html .  • Roach, J., Is drought on the horizon? Researchers turn to AI in a bid to improve forecasts, 2019 . Availabl e  at: https://blogs.microsoft.com/ai/ai -subseasonal -weather -forecast/ .  • Robles, A.G., Towards a European AI, data and robotics partnership , 2020, Copernicus and Artificial  Intelligence Workshop, 28 J anuary 2020, Brussels, Belgium . Available at:   https://www.copernicus.eu/sites/default/files/2020 -02/Ana%20Garcia.pdf .  • Rolnick, D. et al., Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning, 2019. Available at:   https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05433 .  • Rusch, N., Arora, P., AI-based Strategies to Combat Wildlife Trafficking and Wet Markets in Asia. A  Critical Review, Konrad -Adenauer -Stiftung, 2021. Available at:    https://www.kas.de/documents/288143/11403695/Trends+in+Asia_AI based+Strategies.pdf/65a39e6d -1f93- f69b -26e7- d8a19b156e26?version=1.0&t=1611289892785 .  • Sanders, N. et al., Sustainable Supply Chains in the Ag e of AI and Digitisation: Research Challenges and  Opportunities , Journal of Business Logistics, 40(3), 2019, pp. 229–240. Available at:   
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  64  https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b9e942a8f5130f854dbef81/t/5d96005f9826bd1fd807caa 8/1570111587440/Sanders_et_al -2019- Journal_of_Business_Logistics.pdf .  • Schaller Consulting: The new automobility:  Lyft, Uber and the future of American cities . 2018. Availabl e  at: http://www.schallerconsult.com/rideservices/automobility.pdf .  • Schmidt, S., Der Computer ist anderer Meinung, 2021. Available at:  https://www.zeit.de/2021/13/ki kuenstliche -intelligenz -ibm -debattieren -technologie -computer .  • Seifert, I. et al., Potential of Ar tificial Intelligence in Germany’s Producing Sector , 2018. Available at:   https://www.digitale technologien.de/DT/Redakt ion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/PAiCE_AI_Study.pdf?__blob=publicat ionFile&v=5 .  • Seyedzadeh, S. et al., Machine learning for estimation of building energy consumption and  performance: a review . In: Vis. in Eng. 6 (1), 2018.   • Shift2Rail, About , 2021. Available at : https://shift2rail.org/about -shift2rail/ .  • Siemens, Energy intelligence – tapping the potential of a smart energy world , 2020. Available at:   https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/api/uuid:8fc048ca -f107- 4bee -8531e9aa0b57200c/energy -intelligence -siemens -si.pdf .  • Slee, T., The incompatible incentives of private sector AI, in: Dubber , The Oxford Handbook of Ethi c s of  AI, 2020.   • Snow, J., How artificial intelligence can tackle climate change , 2019, National Geographic, 18 July  2019. Available at:  https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/artificial intelligence -climate -change .  • Stear Davis Gleave, Carplus annual survey of carclubs 2016/ 2017, 2017. Available at:   https://como.org.uk/wp -content/uploads/2018/06/Carplus -Annual -Survey -of-Car-Clubs -2016- 17London.pdf .  • Strubell, E . et al., Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP , Preprint 2019.   • Sühlmann- Faul, F, Rammler, Stephan, Der blinde Fleck der Digitalisierung , 2018, pp.119- 122.   • Sumbul, G . et al ., BigEarthNet: A Large -Scale Benchmark Archive for Remote Sensing Image  Understanding , IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 5901 -5904,  Yokohama, Japan, 2019. Available at:  http://bigearth.net/static/documen ts/BigEarthNet_IGARSS_2019.pdf .  • Thapa, B. E. P., Predictive Analytics and AI in Governance: Data -driven government in a free society ,  European Liberal Forum asbl, 2019. Available at:  https://www.liberalforum.eu/wp content/uploads/2019/11/PUBLICATION_AI -in-e-governance.pdf .  • The Federal Government, Artificial Intelligence Strategy of the German Federal Government - 2020  Updat e, 2020. Available at:  https://www.ki -strategie -deutschland.de/home.html .   • Tiiku, A., In the age of car sharing, how AI can solve fleet optimisation , The AI Journal, 2021. Availabl e  at: https://aijourn.com/in -the-age-of-car-sharing -how -ai-can-solve -fleet -optimization/ .  • Trace Genomics, Soil intelligence helps farmers on the front lines of soil health, 2021 . Available at:   https://tracegenomics.com/soil -intelligence -helps -farmers -on-the-front -lines -of-soil-health/ . 
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       65 PE 662.906  • Tussyadiah, I. et al., Nudged by a Robot: Responses to Agency and Feedback , Annals of Touri sm  Research, 2019. Available at:    https://www.tussyadiah.com/TussyadiahMiller_2019_Nudged%20by%20a%20Robot.pdf .  • Uddin, M., M odeling Freight Mode Choice Using Machine Learning Classifiers: A Comparative Study  Using the Commodity Flow Survey (CFS) Data, National Transportation Research Center, 2021 .  Available at:  http://www.people.cecs.ucf.edu/neluru/Papers/Freight_mode_choice_ML_TPT.pdf .  • UN Global Pulse  FAO, UN Open GIS: Geo -AI Working Group. First consultation call report, 2 020,  https://www.unglobalpulse.org/project/un -open -gis-initiative -geo-ai-working -group/    • UN, United Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence , ITU, 2018.  Available at:   https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu -s/opb/gen/S -GEN -UNACT -2018- 1-PDF -E.pdf .   • UN, United Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence , ITU, 2019. Available at:  https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu -s/opb/gen/S -GEN -UNACT -2019- 1-PDF -E.pdf .  • UN, United Nations Activities on Artificial Intelligence , ITU, 2020. Available at:   file:///C:/Users/JF372~1.SCH/AppData/Local/Temp/2020%20UN%20Activities%20on%20AI.pdf .  • UN, The age of digital interdependence, Report of the Secretary -General´s High -level Panel on Digital  Cooperation, 2019. Available at:  https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/DigitalCooperation -report for%20web.pdf .  • UN, Report of the Secretary General – Roadmap for  Digital Cooperation , 2020. Available at:   https://www.un.org/en/content/digital -cooperation roadmap/assets/pdf/Roadmap_for_Digital_C ooperation_EN.pdf .  • UNDP, UNDP supports Tsinghua University in organizing global dialogue on AI cooperation and  governance , 2020. Available at:    https://www.cn.undp.org/content/china/en/home/presscenter/pressreleases/2020/undp supports -tsinghua -university -in-organizing -global -dialogue -.html .  • UNEP 2021, Launch: Coalition for Digital Environmental Su stainability (CODES ). Available at:   https://www.unep.org/events/webinar/launch -coalition -digital -environmental -sustainability codes .  • UNESCO, First draft of the recommendation on the ethics of artificial intelligence , SHS/BIO/AHEG AI/2020/4 REV.2, 2020. Available at:   https://unesdoc.unesco.org/in/rest/annotationSVC/Attachment/attach_upload_feb9258a -94584535- 9920- fca53c95a424 .  • Vatn, A., Institutions and the Environment , 138- 163, 2007.   • Veritone, Real -time predictive AI for smart grid optimisation and resilience, 2021. Available at:   https://www.veritone.com/solutions/energy/ .  • Vilijoen, S., Democratic Data: A Relational Theory For Data Governance , Yale Law Journal, 2020.  Available at:  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3727562# .  • Vinuesa, R. et al., The role of artificial intelligence in achieving the sustainable development goals ,  Nature Communications 2020, 11:233. Availab le at:  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 019- 14108- y.  • Vivacity Labs, TfGM chooses Vivacity Labs to deploy AI -controlled road junctions to optimise traffic  networks , Vivacity Blog, 2020. Available at:  https://vivacitylabs.com/greater -manchester -chooses vivacity -labs -to-deploy -ai-controlled -road -junctions -to-optimise -traffic -networks/ . 
IPOL | Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies     PE 662.906  66  • Wadud, Z., Leiby, P., Help or hindrance? The travel, energy and carbon impact of highly automated  vehicles , 2016, Transp ortation Research Part A Policy and Practice 86: 1 -18. Available at:    https://www.researchgate.net/publica tion/286202541_Help_or_hindrance_The_travel_energy_a nd_carbon_impact_of_highly_automated_vehicles .  • Walter, A . et al.,  Opinion: Smart farming is key to developing sustainable agriculture , Proceedings of  the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 114, no. 24, 2 017, pp. 6148–6150. Available at:   https://www.pnas.org/content/114/24/6148 .  • Wang, D. et al. , Reimagining City Configuration: Automated Urban Planning via Adversarial Learning ,  Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems,  Lu, C. T. (ed), Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, United States, 2020, pp. 497 – 506. Available at:  https: //dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3397536.3422268 .  • Wilts, H. , Berg, H., The digital circular economy: can the digital transformation pave the way for  resource -efficient materials cycles? , in brief, Wuppertal Institut, 2017 . Available at:   https://epub.wupperinst.org/frontdoor/deliver/index/docId/6978/file/6978_Wilts.pdf .  • Wolodzko, T., MLOps at GreenSteam:  Shipping Machine Learning (Case Study) , 2021. Available at:   https://neptune.ai/blog/mlops -at-greensteam -shipping -machine -learning -case study?utm_source=deepai&utm_medium=post&utm_campaign=blog -mlops -at-greensteam shipping -machine -learning -case -study .  • World Bank , Data for better lives, World Development Report , 2021, Avaible at:  https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2021 .  • World Economic Forum, Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for the Earth , Fourth Industrial Revolution for  the Earth Series, 2018.  Available at:    http://www3.weforum.org/docs/Harnessing_Artificial_Intelligence_for_the_Earth_report_2018.pdf .  • Wu, N. , Silva, E. A., Artificial Intelligence Solutions for Urban Land Dynamics: A Review , Journal of  Planning Literature, vol. 24, no. 3, 2010, pp. 246–265. Available at:   https://10.1177/0885412210361571 .  • Wuepper, D., Does it matter who ad vises farmers? Pest management choices with public and private  extension , Food Policy 99, 2020. Available at:  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2020.101995 .  • ZenRobotics, Robotic waste recycling solutions, 2021. Available at:  https://zenrobotics.com/ .  • Zhang, L . et al., Fuel economy in truck platooning: a literature overview and directions for future  research , Journal of Advanced Transportation, vol. 2020 . A vailable at:   https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2604012 .  • Zhao, C.  et al ., Crop Phenomics: Current Status and Perspectives , Frontiers in plant science, vol. 10,  2019, p. 714.   • ZUG, Green Consumption Assistant für nachaltigen Konsum (GCA), 2021. Available at:  https://www.z u-g.org/aufgaben/ki -leuchttuerme/projektuebersicht -fl2/gca/ .  • Zweig, K., Algorithmische Entscheidungen: Transparenz und Kontrolle , Konrad Adenauer Stiftung,  Analysen und Argumente, 338, 2019. Available at:    https://www.kas.de/documents/252038/4521287/AA338+Algorithmische+Entscheidungen.pdf/5 33ef913- e567- 987d -54c3- 1906395cdb81?version=1.0&t=1548228380797,%20zuletzt%20gepr%   C3% BCft%20am%2017.12.2020 .  
The role of A rtificial Intelligence  in the European Green Deal       3 PE 662.906    
    PE 662.906  IP/A/AIDA 2020- 03  Print  ISBN  978- 92-846- 8050- 4 | doi: 10.2861/751111 | QA -02-21-604- EN-C  PDF  ISBN  978- 92-846- 8049- 8 | doi: 10.2861/882830 | QA -02-21-604- EN-N                                   Artificial Intelligence (AI)  can be deployed for a wide range of applications to promote the goal s of  the European Green Deal. However, adverse environmental impacts of AI could jeopardise the  attainment of these goals. The report describes environmental  potential, clarifies characteristics and  causes of environmental risks, and outlines initiatives and best practices for environmental policies.  It illustrates the need for regulatory action to align design and deployment of AI with the goals of  the European Green Deal and concludes with specific recommendations.     This document was provided by the Policy Department for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life  Policies at the request of the Special Committee on Artificial Intelligence in a Digital Age (AIDA).  
