  1    Statement by the French Presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of  Europe at the Conference of Ministers of Justice on “Digital Challenges for Justice in  Europe”   (15 October  2019)     For 70  years, the Council of Europe and its member States have been committed to promoting and  protecting human rights, democracy and the rule of law ,  values that are enshrined in the European  Convention on Human Rights. The Organisation  has shown its ability to adapt to new challenges  brought abou t by the transformation of European societies, which has intensified as a result of  technological progress.   The development of digital technology is both a n opportunity and a  challenge for justice systems in  Europe, which are founded on the primacy of law , respect for human rights and the principles of  judicial independence, impartiality and efficiency. In particular, new technologies have important  implications for citizens seeking to access law and justice, as well as the suppression of crimes and  offenc es they may be victims of.   The Helsinki conference of 26  and 27  February  2019, which addressed the impacts of artificial  intelligence ’s development on human rights, democracy and the rule of law, underlined the significant  progress made by the Council of Europe in this field, including its adoption in 2018 of the Protocol  amending the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of  Personal Data, as well as the European Ethical Charter on the use of artificial intelligen ce in judicial  systems.   It is essential that the Organisation  continue its work to ensure that justice systems can take greater  advantage of digital technology while preventing any harmful effects that it may have on our shared  values. The Council of Euro pe has a key role to play in Europe in  supporting the development of  standards to achieve this goal.   Given the discussions that took place during this conference, the French Presidency of the Committee  of Ministers:   1. Encourages ongoing dialogue and coop eration among Council of Europe member States on the use  of digital tools in the justice field;    2. Supports the ongoing assessment of  the feasibility of a legal framework for the development,  design and application of artificial intelligence, based on th e standards of the Council of Europe  for  human rights, democracy and the rule of law, as requested by the Committee of Ministers at its 129th  session;   3. Supports the creation of an ad hoc  committee on artificial intelligence to conduct this assessment ;   
  2      4. Recalls the need to take into account the following principles when developing Council of Europe  tools and instruments for justice and digital technology:   i. Digital access to law and justice should supplement non -digital access. In particular,  digital access must support better understanding of the law, better access to court  rulings, better knowledge of these rulings and sound understanding of these rulings b y  citizens and legal professionals.   ii. The use of digital tools and algorithms in the justice field must not  have a ny  discriminatory effect on individuals , and must guarantee respect for privacy and the  right to data protection.   iii. Although the use of digital t ools and algorithms offers new options for  alternative   dispute settlement and aids to decision -making, it should not affect the right to  effective access to a judge and judicial oversight, or the right to individuali sed court  rulings.   iv. The use of digital to ols should respect the right to a fair trial and the secrecy of  investigations, and comply with requirements for transparent and intelligible court  rulings.    v. The use of these tools should prevent the spread of illegal content and fake news,  which have a se rious impact on our democratic societies , while  guarante eing freedom  of expression and information . 
