   APPROVED by   Resolution No 394 of  the Government of the Republic of Lithuania of  25 April 2018       LITHUANIA: THE NATIONAL REFORM PROGRAMME FOR 2018       CHAPTER I  INTRODUCTION     1. The National Reform Programme for  2018 (hereinafter – NRP) summarizes the key  structural reforms that are being implemented or are planned to be implemented in order to  overcome the major economic and employment challenges by Lithuania as a European Union  (hereinafter – EU) member state participating in the European Semester for economic policy  coordination (hereinafter – European Semester). In pursuit of economic and employment growth,  each year member states present their NRP to the Eu ropean Commission (herei nafter – EC).  2. In 2017, the Lithuanian economic growth (3.8 percent) exceeded the E U average (1.4  percent), and an even faster growth is planned for 2018. The rate of unemployment accounted for  7.1 percent in 2017 and was 0.8 percentage point lower than in the previous year.   3. The NRP lists actions of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania (hereinafter – the  Government) that were taken in the implementation of the Council Recommendation of 11 July  2017 on the 2017 National Reform Programme of Lithuania and delivering a Council opinion on  the 2017 Stability Programme of Lithuania :  3.1. to pursue fiscal policy in line with the requirements of the preventive arm of the  Stability and Growth P act, which implies to remain at its medium term budgetary objective in 2018,  taking into account the allowances linked to the implementation of the systemic pension reform and  of the structural reforms for which a temporary deviation is granted. Improve ta x compliance and  broaden the tax base to sources that are less detrimental to growth. Take steps to address the  medium term fiscal sustainabilit y challenge related to pensions ;  3.2. to address skills shortages through effective active labour market policy measures and  adult learning and improve educational outcomes by rewarding quality in teaching and in higher  education. Improve the performance of the healthcare system by strengthening outpatient care,  disease prevention and affordability. Improve the adeq uacy of the social safety net ;  3.3. to take measures to strengthen productivity by improving the efficiency of public  investment and strengthening its linkage with the country's strategic objectives.   4. The NRP was drawn up considering the Annual Growth Su rvey published by the EC on  22 November 2017, which starts the European Semester for  economic policy coordination for  2018,  and the priorities set for the entire EU and each member state individually, namely, to create the  greatest possible number of jobs,  to ensure a faster economic growth and investment.   5. On 7 March 2018, the EC presented “Country Report. Lithuania 2018”, which covers the  overall economic assessment of Lithuania, the implementation of Council recommendations for 
2   2017, the execution of s tructural reforms and progress of the implementation of the national goals  under strategy “Europe 2020 ”. According to the assessment of the implementation of the  recommendations, this year Lithuania was attributed to more advanced member states. The key  challenges faced by Lithuania identified in the report include: ensuring the growth of  domestic and  foreign investors and increas ing investment s, especially in human capital, productivity and supply  of labour force. The NRP lists key actions by the Governm ent in order to tackle the challenges.   6. The NRP consists of the following parts :  6.1. Lithuanian macroeconomic outlook in line with the draft Stability Programme of  Lithuania (Chapter 2 of NRP);   6.2. Policies and ongoing reforms that address the main eco nomic challenges (Chapter 3 of  NRP);   6.3. Information on the implementation of “Europe 2020” targets (Chapter 4 of NRP);   6.4. Drafting the NRP and interinstitutional cooperation (Chapter 5 of NRP);   6.5. Overview of the Action Plan of the Implementation of  Council Recommendations for  Lithuania for 2017 -2018 (Annex to NRP).     CHAPTER II  MACROECONOMIC OUTLOOK     7. The economic development scenario for 2018 -2021 prepared by the Ministry of Finance  stipulates that the gross domestic product (hereinafter – GDP) of Lithuania will grow by an average  of 2.7 percent per year in medium term. Taking into account the formed tendencies of the  development of the economy and more favourable assumptio ns of external environment, GDP is  expected to grow by 3.2 percent i n 2018 and by 2.8 percent in 2019.   8. In recent years, improving financial situation of households and good customer  expectations encouraged the growth of household consumption expenditure. In 2016, it reached 3.9  percent. With wages growing faster than in flation, household consumption will remain relatively  high. Household expenditure will increase by about 3.7 percent per year in 2018 –2021 and will  significantly contribute to GDP growth.   9. 2017 was a year of investment breakthrough. Expenditures for the formation of gross  fixed capital grew by 7.3 per cent. In the medium -term, the growth of economy will be supported by  continuing growth  level of investment s in the country driven by the need to modernize and  streamline business processes of enterprises due to growing foreign demand, more active  use of  European Strategic Investment Fund  and the EU funds investments. In 2018 -2021, g ross fixed  capital formation -related  expenditure  could grow by about 5.4  percent per year.   10. Lithuanian exporters will have to continue adapting to changing economic  circumstances, managing currency risks, reducing costs of production and increasing operational  efficiency . Persisting wide variety of export (diversification) will create the preconditions for  sustainable export deve lopment in the medium time -period. It is expected that in 2018, real exports  of goods and services will grow by 7 percent, in 2019 – by 5.7 percent, in 2020 – by 5 percent, and  in 2021 – by 4.7 percent . 
3   11. In order to be competitive with the increasing pr ice of work force, business will have to  increase labour productivity, efficiently use means of product ion and labour resources, and  invest in  development (innovation and qualification of human resources) .  12. The average monthly salary in the country in 2 017 increased by 8.5 percent (in the  private sector – by 9.5 percent, in the public sector – by 6.8 percent) and it is the fastest growth  since 2009. In the medium time -period, demand for labour force will continue to exceed supply, and  therefore the  enforcement to raise wages will remain. In 2018, the growth rate of the average wage  (it is expected to grow by 6.6 percent) in the country will also be greatly affected by a rapid growth  of the minimum monthly wage, which increased up to EUR 400 from 1 Ja nuary 2018. The average  wage is expected to grow by 6.2 percent in 2019, and in 2020 and 2021, by 6 percent .  13. With economic growth, the rate of unemployment will continue to decrease , and will  account for 6.5 percent in 2018, 6.1 percent – in 2019, 5.9 percent – in 2020 and 2021.   14. Once the effects of one -off factors that triggered a jump of average annual rate of  inflation in 2017 have passed, more moderate development of prices is expected in the medium  term. Assessing the changed assumptions about o il prices, the average annual inflation rate is  expected to reach 2.9 percent in 2018, and 2.4 percent in 2019 . In the later medium term years, the  price change should stand at 2.5 percent on average per year .    CHAPTER III  POLICY MEASURES THAT HELP TACKLE MAIN ECONOMIC CHALLENGES     15. In 2018, the Government prioritised  six major reforms: the structural reform of  education, covering the levels of secondary education, vocational education and higher education;  health reform, covering levels of all types of t reatment, nursing, measures to promote healthy  lifestyle; a tax reform aimed at making labour taxation more attractive for creation of job vacancies ,  promot ion of  investments and entrepreneurship; reduction of shadow economy allowing submission  of measures  to promote fair tax payments ; a reform of the cumulative pension part that would not  encourage shrinkage of the level of overall income protection in old age; innovation  reform , which  would stimulate investment in innovation, create a major innovation inc entive package, consolidate  and strengthen the research system .    FIRSTH SECTION   LAB OUR MARKET AND EDUCATION POLICY     16. According to preliminary data of the Statistics Lithuania , the average monthly gross  (before taxation) wage, including individual enterprises, increased by 8.5 percent in 2017, or by  EUR 66 and amounted to EUR 840. The average monthly net wage (after taxation) was EUR 660  in  2017 and increased by 9.6 percent over the year, or by EUR 58. Real wage (net wage, taking into  account the av erage change in consumer prices – 3.7 percent) increased by 5.7 per cent per year. In  2017, gross wage grew more rapidly in the private sector (9.5 percent or EUR 72) and amounted to 
4   EUR 833, while in the public sector it increased by 6.8 percent, or EUR 54 , and amounted to EUR  854. The average gross monthly wage of employees in budget institutions in 2017 amounted to  about EUR 831 and increased by 7.4 per cent during the year. During the year, gross wages   increased in enterprises of all economic activities, in particular wholesale and retail trade (by 11.1   percent ) as well as  information and communication (by 10.3  percent ).  17. According to the Economic Activity S cenario for 2018 -2021, published by the Ministry  of Finance, it is expec ted that in the period from 2018 -2021,  wages will increase by 6.2 per cent on  average per year. Wages will be the fastest growing in private sector, especially in the areas where  labour demand is high and wages are the lowest.   18. From 1 July 2017 , the Labor  Code came into force, the aim of which is more flexible  regulation of labo ur relations  in order to encourage employers to create new high -quality job  place s,  while ensuring security for employees. The Labour Code i ntroduced  more new types of  employment co ntracts, provides for the formation of more flexible working time regulation,  shortening of the notice periods when dismissing employees and reduction of severance pay -offs by  transferring part of the severance pay to the Long -Term Benefits Fund, and the p ossibility of  concluding fixed -term employment contracts for permanent jobs . New provisions that provide  lifelong learning opportunities, ensure  a balance between family and work life, non -discrimination  at work, and the protection of personal data are ens hrined. One of the factors that led to a decrease  in the number of minimum wage earners is the fact that the new Labour Code states that the  minimum wage may be paid only for unskilled work. The wages of workers  who did unskilled work   and received a minimu m wage till 1 July 2017 , increased  after 1 July 2017 . In July 2017 , the  minimum monthly wage was received by  almost 23  percent  (i.e., 62 thousand) less workers   compared to the same period in 2016, in July 2017 , compared to December 2017 , by 13 percent  less, i.e. almost 27 thousand workers.     Labour market     19. Under the  Interinstitutional Action Plan for the Programme of Raising the Employment  2014 -2020 following  measures are aimed at integrating the people facing difficulties on the labour  market into the labour market  are planned : support for start -ups, partially funded business  investment projects are implemented in the areas with the highest unemployment level, new job  places are established for local unemployed people, part of the wage is  compensated to recruit  people facing difficulties on the labour market, and the recruitment of socially disadvantaged people  in social enterprises is supported .  20. The Lithuanian Labour Exchange, under the Ministry of Social Security and Labour  (hereinafter - the Labou r Exchange), will implement projects with the use of the European Social 
5   Fund aimed at increasing opportunities for the integration of young people, the unskilled, the long term unemployed, the elderly (54+) and people with disabili ties into the labour market. During the  implementation of the project “TAPK – Tavo ateities perspektyvų kūrimas” (English: CYFP –  Creating Your Future Perspectives) in 2018 –2020, as many as 23.5 thousand clients of the Labour  Exchange – the long -term unemp loyed who have been looking for job for one year or more,  unskilled persons and persons with disabilities  – will be provided with the opportunity to obtain  qualification and employment  according to the acquired profession; employers who recruit the  clients  of labour exchange will also be provided with possibilit y, if necessary, to use the measure of  subsidy . It is estimated that 12.2 thousand non -working population will take part in vocational  training where they will acquire or improve their existing quali fications/ competences in order to  meet the requirements of job vacancies. 0.6 thousand persons will be able to obtain practice  under  apprenticeship contracts,  and 1,4 thousand persons  – under vocational skills trainees hip. 1.4  thousand job seekers will be granted possibility to participate  in the activities related to the  recognition of competencies acquired by means of non -formal and self -education . 2.7 thousand  persons will be offered to obtain working  skills according to available  or ac quired profession.  7.7  thousand individuals will be involved in recruitment measure through subsidies in order to be able  to return to the open labo ur market as soon as possible . Novelty  – over 1 thousand long -term  unemployed, unskilled and people with disabilities involved in the aforementioned measures will be  reimbursed for travel ling costs to and from work.   21. The Labour Exchange helps the elderly get back to the labour market by offer ing them a  retraining by acquiring a profession in demand  on the market or by offering a wage subsidy to a  prospective employer when they are employed. It is planned that during the i mplementation of the  “Take advantage of the opportunity” project, 4.0 tho usand clients of the Labour Exchange over 54  years of age will be able to acquire profession in demand  on the market or job skills in specific  workplaces  in 2018 –2020 .  22. By Q IV of 2018 , it is planned to prepare the cooperation and integrated assistance  model , and an action plan for  its implementation thereof municipal administrations that organize  and provide monetary social assistance and social services, develop and implement raising the  employment programs, and labo ur exchanges implementing active lab our market policy measures.  This model will combine the promotion of employment and motivation services for unemployed  and persons receiving social support .  23. In 2018, the optimization of the activities of Labo ur Exchange and territorial labo ur  exchanges  will be continued by eliminating excessive management chains, redistributing human  resources and directing them to the direct work with clients as much as possible. From 1 October  2018 , structural changes will take place and employment promotion policy wi ll be implemented by 
6   the Employment Service under the Ministry of Social Security and Labo ur. Following  the structural  changes, the burden on the load per employee would be reduced to 275 c lients (now 405).   24. The Ministry of Social Security and Labour has drafted a Strategy for the Demography,  Migration and Integration of 2018 –2030 (hereinafter – the Strategy), which is submitted  for  consideration to the Parliament . The goal of the project is to solve systemati cally the demographic  challenges in the country, to increase birth  rate, reduce emigration, promote return migration and  improve the quali ty of life of the elderly. The Strategy analyzes current situation and identifies the  main problems: declining number of population, changing age structure of the population,  decreasing number of children and increasing number of elderly people. Taking into account the  current situation, the main goal of the Strategy is to ensure a positive change in the population and a  proportional age structure of the population. Other goals are to  create a family -friendly  environment, ensure the management of migratory flows in line with the needs of the state, enable  the elderly to integrate into society . Measures to achieveme these  goals are also set in the Strategy .  The Government intends to prepare an Action Plan for the implementation of the Strategy  till 24  May, 2018 .    Improving the quality of education and science     25. In order to ensure the implementation of general education financing methodology  throughout the country, a working group has been formed which has to prepare the restructuring of  preschool, early childhood and general education financing.   26. According to international statistics, Lithuania is one of the countries  paying the lowest  wages to teachers. More than half of the teachers’ wages range from EUR 400 to 800, and only  about one -third of teachers are paid at least EUR 1000. In order to create more favourable  conditions of the payment for teachers’ work, it is e xpected that from 1 September 2018 a new staff  remuneration system will be applied throughout Lithuania. The aim is optimize inefficiently used  educational infrastructure and direct the saved funds to educational needs .  27. The average salary of Lithuanian  researchers is 4 times lower than the EU average. In  2017, for the first time since 2008, the wages of researchers  have been  increased – an additional  amount of EUR 3.1 million  has been allocated . In 2018, the target is to increase the funding of basic  research and experimental development (hereinafter – R&D) financing by 20 percent.   28. The working group has drafted proposals for changing the methodology for financing of  studies. The implementation of  the principle of state -funded bachelor ’s study of free  higher  education  is planned in 2018 . The preliminary number of study places was approved on 13 April  2018 which will allow to guarantee free studies in the areas important for the country.  
7   29. In order to create favo urable conditions for qualitative vocat ional training, in view of the  needs of the labo ur market, a review of the financing of vo cational training is planes. T he  preparation of a new financing procedure is envisaged  by the end of 2018 .  30. On 19 December 2017, t he Parliament  adopted the amendme nt of Law on Education  (came into force on 1 February 2018). It provides for the possibility to start early children   institutional education (from 5 years) from September 2018 and, accordingly, primary  education  (from 6 years).   31. In order to impr ove the quality of education,  strengthen competences  of the pupils , a  longer term of education process is validated from September 2017 : in classes  1-11, the number of  days of education was increased  by 10 days in 2017/2018 , in 2018/2019 – by 5 days. In 2018, it is  planned to update  general education programs, prepare and start implementing a full -time school   model. In order to improve digital skills of children, a pilot project on the development of  informative skills in primary schools is being launched in 10 sc hools.   32. In 2017, a sequence of integrated assistance for children and families was created, and  the position of interinstitutional co -ordinator in municipalities was established .  33. In order to promote the implementation of program mes for the preventio n of violence ,  bullying and the introduction  of integrated social emotional competences into the general  educational content, the introduction of 8 preventive program mes has started in 265 schools.   34. In order to enhance the development, diversity, accesi bility  of non -formal education and  improve the quality, a review and increase of the funding for non -formal education is planned by  reducing the differencies of non -formal education possibilities between urban and rural areas. In  2018, a model for ensuring  the quality of non -formal education of children and activities of their  suppliers is planned to be approved.   35. It is planned to create and implement a system for training and qualification  improvement for teachers. In 2018, it is planned to approve the qualifica tion improvement  priorities, prepare a draft model for the assessment of the activities of teachers and assistance to a  pupil (except  for psychologists). In Q  III of 2018, admission to the 3 National Teacher Training  Centers should be launched  in Vilnius, Kaunas and Šiauliai .  36. In pursuance of better conformity of the education system with the demand  of the labo ur  market, the EC project on national coordination “National Coordination of the Adult Education  Action Plan ” is being implemented. The q ualifications of adult education coordinators will be  improved in the regions of Lithuania. The aim will be to strengthen adult education at local level,  considering  the needs of the labo ur market and the local population  in order to increase the number  of learners and to develop accessibility and supply of learning services in municipalities to adults.  
8   37. According to the Survey of Adult Skills ( PIAAC ) data, the training cycle will be  continued in the regions  by involving  the coordinator s. It is planned to update the Adult Learning  Information System (SMIS) and publish examples of good regional experiences there.   38. On purpose to promote adult learning through the expansion of non -formal ad ult  education servi ces, in 2017  a tender for the financing of non -formal adult education programmes  was organized. It is planned to announce tender  in 2018. T he amount planned to be allocated is  EUR 145 thousand .  39. In order to develop a modern vocational education system, an Action Plan for the  Development of Lifelong Learning 2017 –2020 was approved. T he review of the status of vocational  education and training was perform ed for the first time. A n electronic centralized system for  admission to vocational education and train ing has been developed, and the preparation of 6  standards has been launched. At the end of 2017, the contracts were concluded with the persons  who prepared the vocational education and training curricula. The preparation of the action plan for  the develop ment of sectoral practical training and enhancement of apprenticeship has been  commenced .  40. The preparation of the Procedure for Presentation of Vocational Guidance is planned in  2018. It is also envisaged to prepare a procedure for the validation of sho rt-term professional  studies .  41. A working group has been formed, which has to prepare proposals for a new procedure  of admission to art studies and proposals for the preparation of art specialists for regions. It is also  planned  to update the procedure for admitting students to higher education institutions .  42. It is expected to validate t he network of joint schools, approve the reorganization plan of  vocational education and training network and optimize the network of science and study  institutions. The Parliament  approved the Plan for the Optimization of the Network of National  University  on 29 June 2017. The measures for the implementation of the Plan for the Optimization  of National University Network were approved by the Go vernment o n 22 November 2017 . The  measures include  the optimization of n ational university network, financial support from the state  budget and the EU Structural Funds for the period 2014 -2020 , and co -financing funds are foreseen.  The universities particip ating in the reform by proposal of the Ministry of E ducation and Science  have prepared and submitted action plans for their restructuring in 2017 –2020 .  43. The draft Resolution amending the  Resolution On the Approval of Description of  Awarding and Administ ration Procedure of Social Scholarships for the Students of Higher  Education Schools was prepared that aims at increasing the availability of studies and encouraging  students from disadvantaged families, orphans and students with disabilities. Project has been  submitted to the Government.  
9   44. Regulations of the Research Doctoral Studies were approved on 8 March 2017.  Regulations of Doctoral Studies in Arts were approved  on 8 February 2017. The participation of  foreign science and study institutions in the doctoral process in Lithuania has been adjusted more  thoroughly, requiring a real contribution from them. The requirements of international articles for  dissertations h ave been enhanced .  45. A model for financing the studies of citizens of Lithuania in the strongest schools of  higher education in Lithuania based on the commitment to work for Lithuania for a specified period  is expected to be developed and the introductio n thereof will be commenced in 2018 .  46. In the implementation of the provisions of the Law amending the Law on Vocational  Education and Training adopted on 14 December 2017 the Research and Higher Education  Monitoring and Analysis Centre (hereinafter – MOSTA) is authorized to carry out the forecast for  the needs  of qualifications. T he activities related to updating the means for forecast for the needs of  qualifications using the data of National Human Resources Monitoring are expected to be  commenced in 20 18.  SECOND SECTION   SOCIAL AND HEALTH POLICY     Reducing poverty, social exclusion and income inequality     47. From 1 January 2018 the amount of state -supported  income increased from EUR 102 to  EUR 122; the minimum monthly wage  – from EUR 380 to EUR 400, the minimum hourly wage -  up to EUR 2.45; a new basic pension was set at EUR 152.92 – by 17.7 percent  more compared to  December 2017; the minimum monthly maternity, paternity and parental leave allowance has  increased as well , it may not be less than EUR 228; a new basic wage  (salary) for the employees of  budgetary institutions has been  established – it is increased from  EUR 130.5  to EUR 132.5.   48. The amendments to the  Law on Establishment of Reference Values and Basic Rate of  Fines and Penalties of Social Security Benefits entered into force from 1 January 2018, which  established a new starting rate for social security benefits – the size of minimum consumption needs  (hereinafter – MVPD) and valid starting rates of social security benefits – basic social benefits,  bases of relief pensions, the target compensation bases, link of state -sponsored income with this  size. The law stipulates that starting from 2019 , the basic social benefit may not be less than 16   percent,  the relief  pension base may not be less than 54  percent , the target compensation base may  not be less than 47  percent , state -sponsored  income may not amount to less than 50  percent than  last  year’s MVPD. This  means that the MVPD will be calculated on annual basis  and the amount  of  social support will increase depending on the increasing annual inflation, the prices of food and  non-food products and services.  
10   49. A new wording of the Law on Benefits for Childre n entered into force from 1 January  2018. The new version of the law validate the payment of child benefit (child money) of EUR 30, as  a universal benefit, to all children from birth to 18 years of age or older if they learn according to  general education programme, but not longer before they reach the age of 21 years. Families who  raise and (or) foster one or two children will be entitled to an additional child benefit if the family  income per person per month is lower than the 1.5 state -supported income s ize (from 2018 – less  than EUR 183): for a child from birth to 2 years – EUR 28.5, from 2 to 18 years of age and older if  they learn according to general education programme, but not longer before they reach the age of 21  years – EUR 15.2 . In addition, a c hild benefit  for families raising and (or) fostering  three or more  children is paid without considering the income of the family. It is estimated that in 2018 , 410  thousand  children (a total of 530.8 thousand children) will receive an additional child bene fit and   the risk of poverty among children from birth to the age group of 18 will decrease by about 2.7  percentage points (from 25.6 to 22.9 percent).   50. Considering the results of the monitoring of the implementation of the legal regulation  of social assistance, in order to increase the scope and adequacy of provision of  monetary social  assistance, ensure better financial support to f amilies raising children, and  motivate the active  integration of recipients of benefits into the labour market, Law on M onetary Social Support for  Deprived Citizens has been amended . From 1 January 2018, i t is established that when allocating  monetary social support, the families raising children will receive a higher social benefit and  compensations for heating, hot and dr inking water costs, as child benefit paid according to the Law  on Benefits to Children, is not included in th e family income. T he following tolerable income level  has been established: the part of income related to the employment relationship (depending on  the  family composition and the number of children in the family from 15 to 35 percent) is not included  in the family (personal) income. In order to make monetary social assistance more effective, the list  of types of additional social support in new forms  has been expanded , providing for a legal basis for  municipalities to allocate not only an one -off benefit,  but also targeted, periodic and conditional  benefits. Changes will particularly affect working families and families with children: the size of  mone tary social support (the social benefit per person per month is expected to increase by about 22  percent in 2018 (from EUR 65.5 to EUR 80) will increase and the real income of needy families  will increase as well (due to the part of the income from work an d benefits to the child not included  in the family income). In addition, about 20 thousand residents of Lithuania will receive monetary  social support .  51. By amend ing the Law on Social Insurance Pensions, the social insurance pension system  is being refor med. Amendments to the law entered into force  on 1 January 2018 : the procedure for  calculating social insurance pensions is changed, it becomes clearer and more transparent ; pension 
11   rates are more closely linked to the paid pension insurance contributions;  it is expected to create  conditions ensuring the financial sustainability of the pension system and the adequacy of pension  rates. A lso, the amendments to the law provide for a utomatic indexation of pensions  based on clear  criteria. Social insurance pensions will be automatically indexed each year according to the floating  7-year average fund growth rate of the wage . Under the new pension indexation procedure, from 1  January 2018 , social insurance pe nsions were indexed by 6.94 per cent. The procedure for  calculating the amount of incapacity for work has changed  as well  – instead of the distribution of  pension amounts by 3 groups, the amounts of these pensions are directly related to capacity for  work determined to person  by 5 percent interval.   52. The automatic mechanism for indexation of social insurance pensions will maintain the  social security pension system financially sustainable in the medium and long term s. However, in  the medium term, a 0.64 percent  of GDP deficit  resulting from  relief  allowances and state pensions   is projected . In this regard, the Plan of the Implementation of the P rogramme of the Government of  the Republic of Lithuania provides for the systematic evaluation of the state pension system and  submission of proposal s for its improvement. By using EC technical assistance for fulfilment of  structural reforms, the assessment of the financial liabilities of the state pension system is  performed  in Q II of 2018 .  53. From 1 January 2018, the Ministry of Finance has taken over all the debts of the budget  of State Social Insurance Fund. It is verified  in the Law on Approving the Financial Indicators of  the State Budget and Municipal Budgets for 2018. This takeover will n ot change the amount of  consolidated national debt. In recent years, the budget of State Social Insurance Fund has been  balanced. Transferring debt to the state budget will allow seeing financial flows clearer, easier  planning of changes in contributions a nd payments . Also, the costs of financial administration will  decrease and the fund will save more than EUR 100 million per year, which was comprised of the  interest. At the end of 2017, the debt of the budget of State Social Insurance Fund amounted to EUR   3.7 billion: it comprised EUR 3.682 billion loan and  EUR 3 million interest.   54. The tax reform intro duced by the Government in 2018  aims  at making labo ur taxation  more attractive to creation of job places , the consideration of the issue of maximum income  from  which the  social security contributions would not be calculated is considered : it is discussed  whom  and under what conditions the “ceiling ” for social security contributions could be set.   55. The social housing fund will be expanded : the housing available on  the market  will be  rented , incentives to the tenants  will be introduced , and all persons and families entitled to receive  support for renting the housing will be entitled to receive compensation for part of the housing  rental. 
12     Health protection     56. On purpose  to prolong the years of healthy life, it is necessary to actively promote  healthy lifestyle  by develop ing such  skills from birth, improve me ntal health of the society, and   reduce the use of psychoactive substances:   56.1. from 1 January 2018 , the requirements for selling alcohol and advertising it have been  tightened: persons under the age of 20 may not buy, possess and use alcoholic beverages, the time  of sale of alcoholic beverages  has been defined , and the advertising all typ es of alcohol has been  prohibited . In 2018 –2019, active prevention of the use of psychoactive substances will continue. It  is planned that the consumption of alcohol per one resident of the country over 15 years of age, in  litres of absolute alcohol will d ecrease from 17.8 (in 2014) to 12.4 (in 2020);   56.2. improving the accessibility and quality of public health care services, in 2018 special  attention is paid to improving the health of pupils. It is planned that the share of school -age children  who eat ve getables will increase from 36.5 percent (in 2016) to 45 percent (in 2020), while the  share of school -age children, who do sports 60 minutes or longer every day after the lessons will  increase by 0.5 percent every year from 9.7 percent in 2016 and will rea ch at least 11.7 percent in  2020 ;  56.3. while improving public mental health , the aim in 2018  will be  to reduce  the number of  suicides, by developing the system for early identif ication of possible  suicides and provision of   complex assistance  through intro duction of  innovative preventive measures for strengthening   mental health. It is planned  that suicide mortality (mortality rate per 100 thousand inhabitants) will  decrease from 30.8 (in 2015) to 19.5 (in 2020). According to preliminary data, in 2017 the value of  this indicator is 26.7;   56.4. by expanding the supply of healthy lifestyle, the research to prove the effectiveness of  natural spa resort factors  will be carried in the years 2018 -2020 . This will strengthen the use of spa  factor s in rehabilitation and health promotion processes.   57. In order to improve the quality, safety and availabil ity of personal healthcare services,  the consolidation of the network of healthcare institutions is continued :  57.1. from 1 November 2017, five independent centres for addictive disorders started  operating as a single institution – the National Centre for Addictive Disorders.  This will allow the  optimization of the management of budget institutions operating in the field of personal health care,  improvement of the prevention of addictive disorders and the availability of treatment services  provided in the a rea of personal health care  to all population as well as the quality of these services ;  57.2. the Fourth Plan of Health Care System Development and Hospital Network  Consolidation  was carried out in 2016 –2017. The final results of the plan  implementation  will be 
13   seen in QII  of 2018. B ut already comparing the indicators of the nine months of 2014 with the  indicators for the nine months of 2017, the increase in the number of outpatient services by 3.32  percent is seen . According to preliminary data, the number of beds for in -patients per 100 thousand  population was 468.3  in 2017 compared with 483.9 per 100 thousand population in 2016;   57.3. the development of complex personal health care cent res (disease clusters) is being  implemented. Significant decrease i n mortality rate within 30 days after hospitalization  is seen ;  57.4. the Government continues to work on the restructuring the hospital network. By Q IV  of 2019, the  modernization of the network and infrastructure of hospital admissions emergency  departmen ts, abandonment of surplus infrastructure, development and implementation of regional  planning and management model for secondary level  outpatient services  through implementation of   reorganization  of the provision of secondary level health services  is planned ;  57.5. the development of family health care services, the transfer of non -medical functions  to family physicians and nurses, reduction of administrative burden (prolongation of medicines by  telephone, reduction of surplus referrals to speciali sts) is in progress. Increase of independence of  nurses. By reducing the number of population served by family physician and increasing the team  of family physicians, it is anticipated that in the year 2019, the time of access to the family  physician will be reduced from 15 days to 7 days .  58. On purpose t o reduce costs of residents spent  on medicines and improve accessibility:   58.1. the amendments of the Description of the procedure for calculating basic prices of  medicinal products administered for outpat ient treatment and medical aid measures and the extra  pay of pat ients for them were approved by the Government on 17 September 2018 . From 1 July  2017, after commencing the application of the abovementioned changes (based on the price list of  Reimbursable M edicinal Products), the extra pays of patients decreased by about 20 percent;   58.2. the Guidelines for Medicines Policy were  approved on 28 August 2017, under which  the main objective of the development of medicines policy is to increase and improve the he alth of  people with the use of the medicines of high added therapeutic benefits, to ensure better access to  medicines, rational use of the state budget and the funds of population. The Plan for the  implementation of Guidelines for Medicines Policy to imple ment the development directions will  be approved in 2018 ;  58.3. description of the procedure for calculating basic prices of medicinal products  administered for outpatient treatment and medical aid measures and extra pay of patients for them  has been amend ed so as to replace the current pricing system for reimbursable medicines by  promoting competition between manufacturers and setting maximum extra pay of patient. These  provisions will come into force from 1 July 2018 . It is planned that after this  impleme ntation the  extra pays of patients will fall by another 20 percent ; 
14   58.4. The preparation of amendments to legislation the implementation of which would  improve the availability of medicines to low -income receiving population and reduce the costs of  these people for medicines is planned by quarter IV of 2018.     THIRD SECTION   AMENDMENTS TO TAXES AND THEIR ADMINISTRA TION     59. In 2017, the tax system in Lithuania has been improved  in a favourable direction for  economic growth as well as in pursuance of more effective tax administration .  60. Amendments to the Law on Personal Income Tax have been adopted in order to reduce  the taxation of the least -paid persons, by which, the monthly  tax-exempt amount of income  increased from EUR 310 to EUR 380 from 1 January 2018, and the amount of additional tax exempt amount of income was waived thereby moving to targeted child benefits that are paid for all  children without evaluating the family i ncome .  61. With the view of distributing the burden of taxes for small businesses more evenly, from  1 January 2018, the principle of taxation of individual income tax was changed – the taxation by  kind of professional activity was waived, by setting the in come of individual activities at the same  rate of 15 percent and adjusting the real burden of taxation by a progressive tax credit, the amount  of which would be calculated according to the established formulas .  62. In order to further promote productive investments and entrepreneurship supporting  regional development, amendments to the Law on Corporate Income Tax were adopted, by which,  from 1 January 2018, the income tax -relief (by reducing the taxable profit up to 100 percent) is  maximized for investors  investing in the technologic renewal, an additional exemption for  enterprises investing in R&D is planned (by applying a reduced income tax rate of 5 percent on  revenue generated from R&D activities), an exemption applied to capital investments is extende d,  and a one -year income tax “holiday” for a new small business is set. In addition, alternative  financing for business are provided with favourable conditions by exempting all income from  collective investment undertakings and risk and private capital ent ities from income tax as well as  without taxing their profit to be distributed to participants – legal entities .  63. On purpose to achieve a higher level of tax system, from 1 January 2018, progressive  real estate tax rates for non -commercial re al estate o f natural persons were  established, continuing  to exempt from taxing the value of such property up to EUR 0.22 million, by applying current rate  of 0.5 percent to the part of the value of such property in excess of EUR 0.22 million, but not  exceeding EUR 0 .3 million, applying a new 1 percent rate to the part of the value of such property  in excess of EUR 0.3 million, but not exceeding EUR 0.5 million, applying a new 2 percent rate to  the part of the value of such property in excess of EUR 0.5 million . 
15   64. In order to expand the tax base that is less harmful to economic growth and, at the same  time, to contribute more by taxing measures to the implementation of environmental objectives  through the adopted amendments to the Law on Excise Duty, excise duty rat es for gas oil were  increased up to EUR 347/1000 l of product from 1 January 2018 (including gas oil used in  agriculture, aquaculture or commercial fishing in inland waters, for which the excise duty rate was  increased to EUR 56/1000 l of product), the exe mption for excise duty rate for environmentally  harmful coal, coke and lignite was abolished. Also, the excise duty rate for smoked tobacco  increased to EUR 60.24 per kilogram of product from 1 January 2018, and from 2018 onwards,  excise duty rates for cig arettes (up to EUR 96 per 1  000 cigarettes), cigars and cigarillos (up to EUR  37 per kilogram of product) increased from 1 March 2018.   65. By encouraging voluntary payment of taxes and improving tax collection, the provision  of services on formation of preliminary value -added tax (hereinafter – V AT) and advance income  tax declarations and cross -checking the V AT invoice data for taxpayers were commenced in 2017 .  The implementation of updated strategy for educating and raising awareness of taxpayers of the   State Tax Inspectorate under the Ministry of Finance in 2017 –2021 was commenced. The IT means  for exchange of taxes and related data between the EU and non -EU states have  been created.   66. In 2018, it is planned  to continue works in order to improve the tax system fav ourable  for economic growth, increase the syst em of tax administration and promote voluntary payment of  taxes also taking into account the proposals on tax reform,  promotion of fair tax payment and  reduction of the shadow economy submitted by the Working Group .    FOURTH SECTION   PROMOTING PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH     67. Labour productivity growth in Lithuania in 2000 –2016 was 4 percent and was one of the  highest among EU countries. In 2016, the rate of nominal labour productivity per hour accounted  for 62.5 percent of the EU average. According to the preliminary data of 2017, the nominal labour  productivity per worked hour in Lithuania grew the fastest among all EU Member States and almost  8 times exceeded the EU average (11.0 percent and 1.4 percent respectively). The country has the  potential to increase productivity by making higher investments in innovation, R&D , attracting  foreign direct investment  (hereinafter – FDI)  and promoting exports .  68. At the end of 2017, the Lithuanian National Productivit y Board  (hereinafter – the NP B)  was established at the Ministry of Economy that performs an analysis of the development  of  competitiveness and productivity as well as the factors stimulating them and prepares proposals for  improvement of further policies . It is planned that by the end of 2018, the NP B will draw up its first  annual productivity report, which will be shared with other national and EU Member States ’ 
16   authorities. It is also planned to strengthen  the an alytical capabilities of the NP B through the  development of cooperation with the authorities of other EU Member States, Global Productivity  Forum  of OECD , the OEC D expert s performing the  productivity analysis  with the view of more  active analytic discussion  between  Lithuania and the OECD, the participation of Lithuanian experts   in OECD productivity events and wider opportunities for Lithuanian experts to use the OECD  productivity statistics.   69. On purpose to increase the productivity growth of very small, small and medium -sized  industrial enterprises (hereinafter – SME s), SME s are provided with the possibility to use  the EU funded measure “Dizainas LT” (English: Design LT) supported activities of which are the  inducement of development and/or deployment of non -technological innovation in production  processes and/or services by customizing original product or service design solutions. The call for  tenders under thi s measure is due in Q IV of 2018 (EUR 2.9 million  is planned ).  70. Industrial SME s will also be able to use the “Regio potencialas LT” (English: Regio   Potential LT) measure, the supporting activity of which will be the implementation of modern  technologies by adapting existing ones and developing new production capacities for the  manufacture of new and existing products. The financing will encourage the  companies to invest in  the acquisition and deployment of new production technological lines, modernization of existing  production lines, installation of internal engineering networks required for the installation of new  technological lines of production o r the modernization of existing ones. The call for tenders for this  measure is due in  Q III of 2018 (EUR 17.8 million is planned ).    Promoting research, development and innovation     71. The implementation of the Government Programme aims at to consolidate  the  fragmented system of science, technology and innovation (hereinafter – STI) as follows: to arrange  the legal regulation, to purify the functions of state institutions responsible for this area and to  define clearly the responsibilities.  The works acco mplished in 2017  and Q I of 2018 :  71.1. the Strategic Council for Research, Development and Innovation (hereinafter – the  RDI Strategic Council) was renewed, which coordinates the development of studies, research,  experimental development and innovation at strategic level (hereinafter – RDI), as well as assess ing  the process of implementation of the strategic documents o n the guidelines for the change of  Lithuanian science and innovation policy, studies, science, technologies and innovations, and  provides recommendations to the Government on improving their implementation. In carrying out  its functions, the RDI Strategic Council should consult with an expert working group consisting of  6 persons delegate d from associations of science and study institutions and 6 persons delegate d  from business associations. MOSTA monitors and analyzes the processes of state RDI policy 
17   form ation and implementation , analyses them and submit s proposals to the RDI Strategic Council  on policy improvemen t;  71.2. encouraging public sector procurement organizations to develop demand -orientated  innovative products, a list of 15 state projects worth EUR 10.17 under  measure “Pre-Commercial  Purchase LT”  was made . The application of this procurement method will help address public  concerns in areas such as healthcare, energy use and safe traffic ;  71.3. by encouraging enterprises to carry out their innova tive activities more actively and  take advantage of the opportunities offered by s cience and business cooperation , in Q II of 2018, it  is planned to announce the tender  under “Inočekiai” (English: InoCheques) (budget EUR 5 million).  Under the same  measure, innovative cheques will be provided for performance of technical  feasibility studies and for the implementation of R&D projects, as well as for the projects with a  Quality Mark from the EC (Seal of Excellence) according to measure “MVĮ instrum entas” (English:  SME  Instrument) , but for those who did not receive the support for the implementation of Stage 1  (Phase) activities (technical and commercial feasibility studies) of the measure “MVĮ instrumentas”.  Continuous selection of projects is planned . In addition,  on purpose to encourage joint research and  business R& D projects that produce higher value added products, in Q II of 2018, it is planned to  call for tender  under “Intelektas LT2” (English: Intelect LT 2) (budget EUR 50 million). During the  implementation of t he activities of the measure , R&D will be support ed, as well as initial  investment of enterprises in infrastructure (which is not publicly available) and fundamental   research (joint R&D projects of mature science and mature business);   71.4. In 2017, the restructuring of the institutional structure of R& D system was initiated.  The purpose of this restructuring is to implement the provision of the Government Program, which  aims at legitimiz ation of  the competence of the Ministry of Education and Science to retain issues  related to support for fundamental (scientific) research, and the Ministry of Economy – issues  related to support for the practical development and marketing of new products. Consoli dation of  policy -making institutions is foreseen;   71.5. a Long-term Research and Innovation Development P rogram me (hereinafter – RDI  program me) and a draft plan for its implementation  are being developed . While c onsolidating the  four strategic documents re gulating the RDI field – The P rogram me for the Implementation of  Priority Research and Experimental (S ocial, Cultural) Development and I nnovation  Development  (Smart S pecialization) Directions and Their P riorities ; Innovation D evelopment P rogram for 2014 – 2020 ; the Programme for the Development of State Studies, Research and Experimental (Social,  Cultural) Development for 2013 –2020 ; and the Program me for the Development of Science,  Technologies and Innovations in the Field of Aerospace for 2016 –2020 – the m ost ambitious  objectives of these programs were included in the RDI program me project  also focusing on current 
18   topical priorities and responding to the latest trends in the future. It is a step towards the formation   and implementation of an integra l and su stainable state RDI policy. The RDI program is expected to  be approved in Q II of 2018  and impleme nted during the 2018 –2030 .  72. Currently, the process of Smart Specialization  Strategy  review is being actively  implemented. Continuous expert discussions are  held, analy ses and evaluations of the priorities of  Smart Specialization  are carried out . The objective is to evaluate the impact of the subjects  operating under the priorities of the Smart Specialization on the economy of Lithuania  through  factors such a s export , created number of  highly qualified job  place s, etc. The information gathered  will allow adoption of  reasoned  decisions so that  the money would effectively be invested  according to  the Smart Specialization areas, which will have the greatest effec t on the econo my of  Lithuania  not only at present,  but also in the future. According to the above analy ses and follow -up  monitoring, a detailed interim assessment of the implementation of the Smart Specialization  Strategy will be carried out in Q III of 20 18 and, if necessary, the required adjustments will be  made. After analyzing the assessment results and assessing the potential of individual priorities and  future perspectives, appropriate solutions will be formed for further investments in the relevant  directions or the formulation of new thematic directions.   73. In January 2018, the innovation platform www.inovacijos.lt was launched . This is a set  of mutually harmonized tools that enable business, academic, governmental representatives  and the  public to receive up -to-date information on innovation, ideas are yet to be developed, support for  the creation, deployment and development of innovation, chan ges in the innovation ecosystem and   changes in legal regulation, recommendations of expe rts and spe cialists in one place. The website is  equipped with a search engine that allows  to perform  searches related to innovations and  development thereof in databases such as the Network of European Enterprises, CORDIS,  HORIZON2020, as well as receivin g the most relevant information about ongoing R&D projects at  national and European level, finding like -minded pe rsons, potential partners, as well as to raise own  competitiveness and, thus, of the entire country.     Digital transformation of industry     74. By continuing the digitization work of the industry and in order to create conditions for  business productivity growth an invitation under measure “Pramonės skaitmeninimas LT” (English:  Industr y Digitization LT) (EUR 38.8 million is planned to be allocated ) will be published in the  Q II of 2018 . Under this measure, t wo activities will be supported. F irstly, possibility to audit an  industrial SMEs  possibility for digitization of their manufacturing processes and prospects thereof.   The second supportive activity is the installation of production process equipment of industrial  SME s with integrated digitization technologies such as robotics, artificial intelligence, automation 
19   and automation technologies, intelligent sensors, cloud s, the Internet of thi ngs, cyber -physics  systems, etc . It is expected that according to the measure “Industry Digitization LT ”, the share of  digital technology acquisition compensated from the EU Structural Funds will be 35 percent, where  the applicant is med ium-sized enterprise, and 45 percent, where the applicant is a very small and  small enterprise .  75. Lithuania has signed 2 agreements with the EC in March 2018, according to which the  granted support will be focused on the implementation of projects aimed at promoting the digital  transformation of the industry. During the imple mentation of the first project ( under the Structural  Reform Support P rogramme for the period 2017 –2020 Lithuania was granted EUR 0.03 million), a  strategic plan for the implementation  of the Action Plan of Implementation of National Industrial   Digitization Initiative will be prepared  in 2018 , and recommendations will be drawn  on how to  strengthen and increase the competitiveness of industry through digitization.  The Strategic Action  Plan will be developed in line with the direction of activities of the National Industry Digitization  Platform “Pramonė 4.0” (English: I ndustry 4.0 ), i.e. digital manufacturing, services promoting  digitization, human resources, standa rdization and legal regulation, and cyber -security. Estimated  duration of the implementation of the project is 6 months.   76. In the context of the second project of EU pilot on industrial transition, representatives  of Lithuania and the EC will cooperate i n addressing issues related to industrial digitization. For the  implementation of this project, a support of up to EUR 0.2 million will be allocated to Lithuania,  under which the external consultancy services in preparing an industrial transformation strat egy will  be funded . After  successful implementation  of first stage , another support of EUR 0.3 million will  be allocated  in 2019  for the implementation of specific actions provided for in the strategy. The  Strategy for the Industrial T ransition  will be pre pared by the Ministry of Economy in cooperation  with experts from the Platform “Industry 4.0 ” and EC representatives.     Development of start -up ecosystem     77. There were 380 start -ups in the “Enterprise Lithuania ” database as at 1 January 2018.  The goal of 2018 is to have 500 start -ups. A working group was formed on 22 February 2018 in  order to submit  proposals on start-ups, their legal regulation and other issues related to the activities  of start-ups that is del egated to submit proposals related to the development of start-ups ecosystem.   78. Promoting the development of start-ups ecosystem , the following works related to  creation of a favo urable business environment for the start -ups and their access to financing  sources  are being implemented:  
20   78.1. it is pla nned to define the concept of start-ups in legal acts and regulate their activities  (draft of the corresponding legislation is planned to be presented to  the Parliament  in the 2018  spring session);   78.2. it is planned to provide high -quality consulting services for the start-ups and  implement training programs in order to improve the qualifications of the start-ups (Q III of 2018);   78.3. it is planned to create a Startup Employee Visa procedure, which will  allow start-ups  to attract highly  skilled workers from abroad (Q  IV of 2018);   78.4. the Accelerat ion Fund is being established. It is a new venture capital financial  instrumen t that will include acceleration  activities : the authors of the ideas will be provided with  active business acceleration services (mentoring, expert consultations , legal assistance, marketing  strategy preparation, etc.), allowing further investment in the implementation of ideas of very small  and small business . The investme nts will be made  in equity capital of the very small and small  business  or partially in the authorized capital at pre -development and preparatory stages  of  enterprises . The first investment is expected at the end of 2018 /at the beginning of 2019, when fund   managers will be selected, wh o will attract the required amount of private funds and with wh om the   contracts will be signed;   78.5. it is planned to enable start -up to allow and publicly distribute equity securities  through co -funded platforms (by the end of 2019);   78.6. the possibilities in relation to the legal regulation of the following issues are under  consideration  and, if necessary, amendments to the Law on Companies will be prepared : review of  the minimum amount of authorized capital to be applied to private limited liability companies ( Q IV  of 2018); review of the legal regulation of the classes of shares of private limited liability  companies (Q  4 of 2018); review of the legal regulation of rights of companies to acquire their  shares ( Q IV of 2019 ).  Improving business environment     79. In Doing Busines 2018 Report  published in 2017, Lithuania ranks  16th and is among top  20 of 190 countries in the world. Compared w ith 2017, Lithuania has climbed up 5 positions – it  was ranked 21st last year. Among the EU Member States Lithuania ranks 6th and is outpacing  countries like Ireland (17), Latvia (19) and Germany (20).   80. Doing Business 2018 Report  indicates that Lithuanias position improved because of  the  implementation of four business -enhancing reforms  in the period 2016 –2017 in the fields of  obtaining construction  permits,  getting electricity, protecting minority  investors and paying taxes.  The time required to issue the construction permits was reduced, rights of small shareholders (a  requirement to d isclose information about participation of board members in the management of  other companies, mai n place of work was introduced) were  enhanced, smart tax system “i.Mas” has 
21   been introduced and terms of connection to the electricity network have been short ened. In the  European and Central Asian region, Lithuania is the second in terms of the number of reforms that  have been implemented to improve business conditions – 31 reforms have been implemented since  2003.   81. Improvement of Doing Business 2018 Report  indicators is one of the priority work s of  the Government  for the period from 2017 –2020 : the Plan of the implementation of the Government   Program me includ es reforms aimed at improving state ratings based on the indicators according to  which Lithuania is t he most lagging behind. It is planned to optimize and shorten the procedures for  setting up and electrifying companies, reforming the insolvency system  in order to increase  efficiency, to st rengthen the protection of minority  investors, to initiate a revie w of the pledge as  the  method for  securing the obligations and the legal regulation of the registration of pledged assets.   Improving business supervision     82. The authorities responsible for the supervision of the activities of entitie s (hereinafter –  supervisory authorities) have made significant efforts and made significant progress in improving  the supervision of business in Lithuania. Surveys conducted by the Ministry of Economy show that  entitie s are positive about the work of supervisors and see the inspectors ’ efforts to help them  understand the requirements  of legal acts .  83. OECD welcomed the implementation of the business supervision  reform, wh ere the  number of routine inspections  is increased , a lot of attention is paid  helping business  entities and  providing them with consultations . Lithuania has enshrined  the application of many advanced  measures in the legislation for business supervision , but it is now crucial to ensure their continued  application.   84. In 2018, the assessment of the perfor mance of supervis ory authoritie s (the scoreboard)  will be made for the first time according to the scope and quality of the application of modern  business s upervision measures, as well as other aspects of supervisory activities related to business  supervis ion. The publication and publicity of the assessment results of the performance  of  supervis ion authoritie s (the scoreboard)  is expected to be a useful tool for improving the business  supervision system, accelerating the implementation of advanced superviso ry tools, taking over  good practice, promoting interinstitutional cooperation and sharing the best practices.   85. Also in 2018, the work s of the development of the Information System for Supervisory  Authorities (hereinafter – the PAIIS) will be continued. After the creation, implementation and after   commencing the use  of PAIIS by supervisory authorities , it will be possible to obtain and supply the  data necessary for the supervisory authorities that carry out the supervisory p rocesses of the entities  in a convenient and prompt manner that will allow:  
22   85.1. to increase the efficiency of activities of supervisory authorities ( develop and/or  improve methodological tools, computerize the risk assessment and management of entities,  reduce  the number of manual ly performed  functions);   85.2. to strive for the entities to better assess activities of supervisory  authorities : optimize  processes in order to make them clearer and more understandable to entitie s; reduce the burden on  entities  (businesses)  both resulting from  repeated provision of data to supervisor y authorities  and  the coordinated timetable for scheduled inspectio ns;  85.3. it is expected  that supervisor y authorities  will use PAIIS when planning and carrying  out inspection s, preparing documents for inspection, sending notices and reminders to entitie s and  communicating with other supervisor y authoritie s. The entities  would use the Business Gateway – Services and Product Contact Centre information system managed by “Enterpris e Lithuania ” – and  would receive  various information from the supervisory authorities  through the one -stop shop  system , submit  documents of various formats to supervisor y authoritie s, would have the opportunity  to review the information about the history o f supervision of activities and would participate in  surveys on supervision activities carried out by supervisory authorities.   86. The Ministry of Economy will prepare proposals for the business supervision  assessment  data and submit them to the Parliament  (deadline – Q II of 2019), and  togeth er with the Ministry of  Finance  will evaluate the optimization of supervisory functions performed by regulated institutions,   and compatibility of planned performance indicators with the provisions of Strategic Planning   Methodology and, if necessary, will submit draft  decisions to the Government (Q  IV of 2018).   87. In 2018, attention will also be paid to the education of general competence of the staff of  supervisory authorities . It is planned to create special program mes for improving the qualification  of supervisory specialists  and strengthening the competence in the field of supervision , and to train  3 500 employees in 2018 –2020. The knowledge and practical skills acquired during the training  will ensure more effective and long -term use of advanced supervisory tools, will stimulate the  implementation of advanced business supervision system focused on business consultancy rath er  than punishment.   88. On purpose  to reduce the bur den of supervision on business,  enhance the  competence of  employee s, increase the efficiency of activity processes carried out by supervisory authorities  and  ensure more efficient use of budgetary resourc es, the consolidation of business supervisory  authorities will be continue d.    Better  regulation     89. According to the data provided by the institutions, it was found  that the administrative  burden on business in 2017 was reduced by EUR 4.6 million, of which EUR 1.8 million 
23   administrative burden was reduced due to the amendments of  legislation regulating the  public  procurement.   90. In reducing the administrative burden, in 2018 it is planned  to:  90.1. review the composition and operational principles of the Commission for Better  Supervisory Regulation, carrying out the tasks related to the asse ssment of administrative burden   and application of its reduction measures, with a view to effective work of  the Commission and  reduc tion of contribution to the a dministrative burdens on business;   90.2. change fundamentally the formation and control of the plan for the measures reducing  administrative burdens focusing not on the amendments of individual legal acts, but on systematic  changes in regulation in a speci fic area ;  90.3. prepare an amendment to the Law on Public Administration which would ensure the  accumulation of all information on licen ces issued in Lithuania in one state information system  (licensing information system). Publicly  provided  and free  information on licen ces issued in  Lithuania will increase confidence of consumer s in business and transparency of licensed business  activities.   Promoting investment and export     91. In 2018, it is planned to continue the following work s: improve the format ion of  investment policy and the implementation of investment promotion system from various sources of  financing. In order to attract large value added production investments, it is planned to create  special legal regulation and targeted incentives for suc h investment projects  in 2018 .  92. In 2017, 39 FDI have been attracted by “Invest Lithuania ” which will create 5 060 new  job place s. Compared to 2016, the number of projects expected to be implemented by  FDI grew by  18 percent  (in 2016 it amounted to 33), and the expected number of job  place s increased by 40   percent  (3 616 job  place s were planned to be created in 2016). The amount of investment in fixed  assets in 2016 amounted to EUR 134.24 million . Last year increased by 53  perce nt and amounted to  EUR 206 million. It is estimated that after implementation of the projects in 2017, about EUR 104  million of taxes  will be paid over the year due to these projects and additional effect on econom y,  and generated value added will exceed EUR 270 million annually.   93. At present, the Ministry of Economy is implement ing the measures of working plan of  the implementation of the Government  Programme  intended  to attract talents, integrate them,   improve the immigration model,  and to create incentives for the returning talents. Together with  “Invest Lithuania ”, 4 projects are implemented: “Establishment and engagement of the talent  attraction unit ”, “Creation of incentive systems for attracting highly qualified specialists ”,  “Impro vement of the immigration model for attracting highly qualified specialists and their 
24   families ”, “Creation of an integration model for highly qualified workers and their families  returning to Lithuania ”. Projects are expected to be implemented by the end Q  II of 2019.   94. In order to facilitate the conditions of employment of highly qualified professional  specialists from third countries in Lithuania, the Ministry of Economy periodically updates the list  of those professions that require high qualifications  and workers that the country is currently most  lacking . Given the needs of the labo ur market, the list is due to be updated in Q II and Q IV 2018.   95. Export results reveal successful efforts of enterprises to entrench themselves in  international markets.  In 2017, compared to 2016, exports of goods increased by 16.9 percent.  According to the branches of the economy, the largest influence on the growth of exports of goods  produced in Lithuania (without mineral products) had the engineering industry, food an d beverage  industry, and furniture and timber sectors. These sectors accounted for 66 percent of the growth of  export of all products of Lithuanian origin (without mineral products) .  96. In order to help the business to entrench themselves in international  markets, the  measures to facilitate the development of Lithuania in the target export markets and to ensure the  efficient use of resources and stable development of short and long -term exports were appro ved and  are implemented in 2017 –2018 .  97. With the v iew of providing SME s with necessary informational, consultative  methodological and other support in the field of export, potential market search, international trade,  in Q III of 2017, the first call for tenders  for the measure “Expo konsultantas  LT” (English: Expo  Consultant LT) was announced  (amount of EUR 5.585 million).   98. On purpose to support the certification of products intended by SME s for export ,  including the necessary tests and research, a call for tenders for the measure “Expo serti fikatas LT ”  (English: Expo cer tificate LT) was announced in Q  IV of 2017  (amount of EUR 1.56 million).   99. In January 2018 , two calls for tenders  for the measure “Naujos galimybės LT ” (English:  New opportunities LT) were announced  in order to encourage SME s to focus on the search for new  foreign markets and the development of existing markets  as much as possible  – a group presentation  of SME s and their production abroad and/or in international exhibitions, fairs to be held in  Lithuania and business missions . By o ne call , EUR 2.4 million was allocated to all SME s, with the  exception of SME s belonging to sector of cultural and creative industries (hereinafter – SME s  attributable to the CCI sector) ; according to the next call, EUR 0.6 million were allocated to SME s  attributable to the CCI sector.   100. In order to encourage the groups of SME s that have decided to operate jointly to join  the international networks so as to find new export markets f or their products, in the Q IV of 2018,  the 2nd call for tenders for the measure “Verslo klasteris LT” (English: Business Cluster LT)   (amount of EUR 3.6 million)  was announced.  
25   101. Considering the dynamics of exports and mobilization of  resources for the most  potential export directio ns, the process of reviewing the target export markets will be launched and  will be carried out by the end of 2018. The most promising markets are to be identified in the light  of the export potential of high ad ded value goods and services. While  implement ing the tasks of  economic activity, the diplomatic services and the diaspora network of Lithuania are being involved  more actively, visits and cooperation initiatives are being coordinated . Long -term targe t measures  are aimed at strengthening the image of Lithuania and business sectors abroad, improving the  national  economic representation system, and refin ing the skills of export specialists. From the end  of February 2018, granting export credit guarantees (EUR 8 million is allocated) to SMEs  were  commence d. Preparatory work s are currently under way, and in Q II of 2018, it is planned to launch  the implementation of measure of portfolio guarantee for factoring (EUR 4.3 million  is allocated ).  Both an export credit guarantee and a portfolio guarantee for factoring measure will help SME s to  expand the ir export activities, strengthen  their competitiveness and promote exports of goods  of  Lithuanian origin . In 2017, a one -stop shop system for exp orters was introduced.     CHAPTER IV  IMPLEMENTATION OF TH E OBJECTIVES OF THE “EUROPE 2020 ” STRATEGY     FIRST SECTION   EMPLOYMENTM , POVERTY AND SOCIAL EXCLUSION     Rate of employment of persons in the 20 –64 age group     Table 1. Rate of employment in the 20 -64 age group   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2016   An employment rate of 75  percent in the 20 -64 age  group  An employment rate of 72.8  percent in the 20 -64 age group  An employment rate of 76.0  percent in the 20 -64 age  group     102. The rate of employment in the 20 -64 age group of individuals was 7 6.0 percent in 201 7  and, compared to 201 6, it increased by 0.8 percentage point.   103. In 2017, the rate of unemployment  in Lithuania  was 7.1 percent,  which  is 0.8  percent age point  less than in 2016.  The rate of unemployment  of men was 8.5 percent,  and the rate  of unemployment  of women  was 5.7 percent  in 2017 . Over  the year,  the unemployment  of men has  decreased  by 0.6 percent,  and women  – by 1 percent.  In 2017,  the youth  unemployment  rate (15-24  years  old) was 13.3 percent  and was 1.2 percent  lower  than in 2016.  In 2017,  the long-term  unemployment  rate was 2.7 percent  and was 0.3 percent  lower  than in 2016.  
26   104. The Action Programme instrument for developing entrepreneurship skills of residents  and initiatives for supporting the establishment and development of businesses in rural areas and  areas with high unemployment levels is being implemented in 2018.   105. Active labour market policy measures for the support of integration of the unemployed  into the labour market are applied in 2018. The priority is given to unqualified long -term  unemployed persons aiming to provide them with marketable skills and develop compe tencies  meeting employer requirements.   106. In order to ensure a rapid and sustainable transition of young people to the labour  market , reduce the rate of unemployment of young people, the implementation of the Youth  Guarantee Initiative and other programmes promoting youth employment are being  continued in  2018.    Individuals facing the risk of  poverty or social exclusion     Table 2. Individ uals facing the risk of poverty or social exclusion   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2016   To reduce the number of  people living in poverty and  facing social exclusion or  people in danger of poverty  or social exclusion by at  least 20 million  To reduce the number of people  living in poverty and facing  social exclusion by at least 170  thousand  people, and the number  of these people in 2020 must not  exceed 814 thousand  871 thousand  residents facing  the risk of poverty or social  exclusion     107. According to data of 201 6, improving economic and employment indicators did not  help reduce poverty in the country. The number of people facing the risk of poverty or social  exclusion was 30.1 percent in 201 6 (compared to 29.3 percent in 201 5). The data of statistical  research of income and living conditions conducted by the Statistics Lithuania revealed that the  poverty risk level was 21.9 percent in Lithuania in 201 6. About 6 30 thousand  residents of Lithuania  lived below the risk of poverty threshold in 201 6, which decreased by 0.3 percent compared to  2015.  108. The highest poverty risk rate was in the group aged 65 and over. In 2016, it amounted  to 27.7 percent and increased by 2.7 percent compared to 2015. The increase was determined by an  increase in the poverty risk level resulting from increased labour income  and a relatively small  increase of old -age pensions.   109. The poverty risk level of people aged 18 -64 compared to previous years decreased by  0.4 percent and it was 19.1 percent i n 2016 ; of children under 18 – decreased by 3.3  percent  and 
27   amounted to 25.6  percent. Decline w as affected by rising wages, decreased  unemployment, grow ing  social security costs for families and children, and raising the minimum monthly wage.   110. In order to increase availability of social services, the development of inpatient a nd  outpatient social service infrastructure will be continued in 2018, providing integral assistance at  home (nursing and social care).   111. Providing support to the most deprived persons, the implementation of the project  funded by the Fund for European Aid to the Most Deprived is planned in 2017 –2018  (value of EUR  32.83 million) . The plan is to provide food assistance to about 280 thousand  most deprived persons.  From 2018, additional activities will be funded that will aim to  reduce social exclusion and/or to  fight social misfortune more resolutely and more sustainably, for example, various  recommendations and consultations  – on balanced nutrition; on budget ma nagement ; legal, medical,  psychological assistance; organized vario us trainings (courses) on the topic of food production,  psychological/emotional training, handicrafts, motivations/self -esteems; occupation for children:  day camp, after -school activities, trips, additional training, etc.   112. In order to create the system  of comprehensively provided services, which would allow  every child, a disabled person or his family members (carers, guardians) to receive individual  services depending on need and the necessary assistance in the community, the 2014 –2020 action  plan for the transition from institutional care to family and community -based services to the  disabled and children deprived of parental care is being implemented.     SECOND SECTION   INNOVA TIONS, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT     Table 3. Investments in research and development (hereinafter – R&D)   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2017   Increasing investment in  R&D to 3 percent of GDP  Increasing investment in R&D to  1.9 percent of GDP  Investment in R&D  accounted for 0.85 percent of  GDP     113. In 2016, EUR 327.6 million were allocated to R& D work s, which made  0.85 percent of   GDP . Com pared to 2015, the ratio of R& D expenditure to GDP fell by 0.19  percentage points (in  2015 R& D expenditure was 1.04  percent  of GDP). This was mostly influenced by 53  percent   reduction  of R& D financing by foreign funds, the majority of which comprised the  EU funds  reallocated through the state budget. It should be noted that in 2016, compared with 2015, business  investment in R &D significantly increased (14.8 percen t) and almost reached the level of  government investments. R&D financing from business funds amounted to EUR 127.7 million, 
28   government funds – EUR 128.4 million. In order to encourage investments in R&D, Lithuania is  implementing Smart Specialization S trategy, where national R&D development policies and  priorities that reflect strengths and greatest potential of our national economy and science are  identified. The funding in R&D provided for the EU funding period of 20 14–2020 amounts to EUR  678.9 million .  114. The 2017 European Innovation Scoreboard indicates that Lithuania has made  signi ficant progress in innovation field.  According to the Scoreboard, Lithuania has risen to 16th  position among 28 EU countries. The innova tion of enterprises was growing. A ccording to  preliminary data from the Statistics  Lithuania , 46.6 percent of enterprises carried out innovative  activity in  the period from 2014 to 2016. Compared to 2012 –2014, the share of enterprises engaged  in innovation activities increased by 5.9 percentage points. In 2016, the cost s of innovative  activities amounted to EUR 1,274.6 million and, compared to  2014, increased  by 17  percent . It  should be noted that the share o f innovative expenditure on R& D performed in the enterprise  has  increased 2 times, and for the purchase of externa l R&D works – 15 per cent.   115. In 2017, the system for evaluation and financing of science and stud y institutions has  been updated. I t has become a two -tier and c onsists of an annual formal R& D assessment and  comparative expert assessment of R&D performed every 5 years. The new evaluation methodology  and financing model are oriented towards the promotion of even closer cooperation between science  and study institutions and the business sector.   116. In accordance with the Strategic Plan of the Ministry of Education and Science for the  period 2017 –2019 and implementing the measure “Ensuring implementation of international  agreements and obligations of Lithuania in the field of R&D and participation in international R&D  programmes ”, the initiative of the promotion to prepare the  Horizon 2020 applications was  continued in 2017. The aim of the m easure is to promote higher quality participation of institutions  of science and studies in Horizon 2020. According to t he measure , the grants for the purchase of  consultancy services for Horizon 2020 application development services  were allocated . Accord ing  to the data of February 2018, Lithuanian  institutions submitted  0.46 percent  of all Horizon 2020  applications, and the success rate of participation (12  percent ) is almost equivalent to the EU  average (13.6  percent ).  117. In 2017, the TYKU2 project implementation was carried on under measure  “Streng thening of the Abilities of Scientists and Other Researchers ”. The project encourages   scientists  and other researchers, science managers from the scientific sector to i ntegrate into  international R& D proje cts. About EUR 0.1 million was allocated to Horizon 2020.   118. In order to develop the policy of involvement  in international research infrastructures  by defining clear involv ement procedures, the procedure and prospects for funding membership 
29   expenses, th e evaluation of the membership results, the waymark mission of the Lithuanian research  and the principles for drawing up  thereof , the Description of the procedure for the waymark  of  Lithuanian research infrastructures and participation in international research infrastructures  was  approved .  119. The activity supported by measure “Development and integration of research,  experimental development and innovation infrastructure in European infrastructures”: involvement  in international research infrastructure s (ESFRI) and renewal, development and expansion of open  access R&D infrastructures required for the participation in international or regional research  initiatives. The funds of this measure are intended for financing membership fees for participation  in new international research infrastructures. At present, investment projects submitted by research  and higher education institutions are evaluated.   120. In order to create a motivational system for young researchers, artists and creators of  arts, humanities  and social sciences, a Description of the  Procedure for the Allocation of Support  for Academic Achievements and Support for Academic Trips to Doctoral S tudents was approved on  26 July  2017.  The goal of providing support for academic achievement is to supp ort efficiently  working  doctoral students . The goal of support for academic trips is to enable the doctoral students  to improve their scientific qualification through participati on in events held abroad,  increase the  international mobili ty of doctoral students, and support the international dissemination of  Lithuanian research results.   121. In 2018, it is planned to create an attractive model for the attraction and reintegration of  foreign researchers into Lithuanian research and higher e ducation institutions in accordance with  the model on fulfilment of RDI direction s of smart specialization.   122. In 2018, the concept of industrial doctoral studies will be launched . The entities will be  able to submit applications for a doctoral competiti on by offering research topics relevant to them,  together with research and higher education institutions. The research of doctoral students who have  chosen these themes will be carried out in the enterprise  and in the research and higher education  institu tion, their dissertations will be focused on solving specific problems of the industry. It will  contribute to the promotion of scien ce-business cooperation, the growth of the number of  researchers in the business sector.   123. The Action Programme measures administered by the Ministry of Economy are  targeted at applied research, experimental development activities, clusterization, promotion and  dissemination of innovation, increasing internationalization of companies, attracting  FDI and  increasing innovation demand necessary for creating innovative products, services or processes. It is  aimed that  the assistance will cover the entire innovation cycle and will become an incentive to  ensure its smooth functioning. The focus is plac ed on each cycle stage – from the formation of a 
30   new product idea to its introduction into the market . Measures  “Inogeb LT“, “Inovaciniai čekiai“   (English: Innovation Vouchers),  “Inočekiai“, “InoConnect“, “Inopatentas“  (English: Inopatent) ,  “Intelektas. Be ndri mokslo -verslo projektai“  (English: Intellect. Common research -business  projects) , “Inoklaster LT”  (English: Inocluster LT) , “Ikiprekybiniai pirkimai LT“  (English: Pre commercial purchases LT) , “Inostartas“  (English: Inostart) , “SmartInvest LT+“, “Smart FDI“,  “Verslo klasteris LT“  (English: Business cluster LT) , “Naujos galimybės LT“  (English:  New  Opportunities LT) , “Expo Sertifikatas LT“  (English: Expo Certificate LT) , “DPT pramonei LT+ “  (English: KET  for Industry LT +), “EcoInovacijos LT“  (English:  Eco-innovation LT) , “Ecoinovacijos LT+“  (English: Eco -innovation LT +), “RegioInvest LT+“, “Pramonės skaitmeninimas  LT“ (English: Industr y Digitization LT) , “Regio Potencialas LT “ (English:  Regio Potential LT) are  implemented for this purpose.   124. Activities of centers of excellence and innovation and technology transfer centers are  being promoted in order to enhance the commercialization potential of science and research  institutions of R&D results and the transfer of knowledge and technology. For t his purpose, the  measure “Promoting the Competence Centres and Innovation and Technology Transfer Centres ” is  implemented. By concentrating R&D potential (researchers, infrastructure) in the competence  centers for experimental activities, opportunities to offer science -based ideas for commercial  potential and prepare them for further investment, as well as the development of business business  solutions, are opened up . This strengthens applied aspect of R& D results. After evaluation of  applications , the comp etence centers  are allocated EUR 6.3 million in Q I of 2018 a ccording to the  measure “Promoting Activities of Competence Cent res and Innovation and Technology Transfer  Cent res”. Innovation and technology transfer cent res operate as a one -window access  system that  can identify business needs, mediate and offer the best team of researchers or market relevant  solutions for  R&D that already have  potential of commercialization . In 2017, funding agreements  worth EUR 5.7 million  were signed with innovation an d technology transfer cent res for the  management of the processes for transfer of knowledge and technology for science and technology  developed in research and study institutions to interested  business entities .  125. In accordance with the measure “Promotion of Commercialization of RDI Results and  Transnationality ” in Q II of 2018, it is planned to announce a call for support for commercializing  the ideas of scientists and other researchers and students working or studying in research and study  institutions, and for the support of emerging young innovative companies (separate enterprises). In  Q III of 2018, a call for invitation to implement market -oriented research and business projects  through the cross -border network (EUREKA) will be launched. The implementation of these two  activities is aimed at stimulation of the commercialization of R&D results and transnationality . 
31   126. In order to facilitate the technological development  in the country , to promote research  aimed at productive innovations that are needed to solve the technological problems of the public  and private sector  also stipulating the provision that they can and must be dealt with on the basis of  high-level research , a technological development project financing instrument is implemented . This  instrument  aims at helping  businesses to involve  in joint R& D projects, and start collaborating with  science. After the call for tender in  2017 , 79 applications from the institutions of science and studies   have been received . Application partners are SMEs .    THIRD SECTION   EDUCATION     Table 4. Reduction of early school leaving of young people   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2017   To ensure that school drop out rates are below 10 percent  To ensure that school drop -out  rates are below 9 percent  The share of school drop -outs  accounts for 5.4 percent     127. In Lithuania, the percentage of early leavers from education and training in the 18 -24  age group is low compared to other European countries, reaching 5.4 percent in 2017 (6.5 percent in  2012, the EU average – 12.8 percent). As in most EU countries, the education system is more often  left by men (7 percent in 2017) than women (3.8 percent in 2017).   Table 5. Retaining the share of persons having completed third level of equivalent education   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2017   To ensure th at at least 40  percent of 30 -34 year-olds  complete third level education  To ensure that  at least 48.7  percent of 30 -34 year-olds  complete third level education  At least 58.3 percent of 30 -34  year-olds have completed  third level education     128. Lithuania holds the leading position among the EU countries according to the share of  30-34 year-olds having completed third level education. In 2017, this indicator reached 58.2 percent  (the EU avera ge was 39 percent ) and was by 12.1 percentage point h igher than in 2012. A higher  share o f women of this age group have  third level education than men (according to the data of  2016 – 68.2 percent of women and 47.9 percent of men ).    FOURTH SECTION   ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE    
32   Increasing the use of renewable en ergy sources     Table 6. Share of renewable energy sources in the final energy consumption   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2016   To increase the share of  renewables to 20 percent of  gross final consumption of  energy by 2020  To increase the share of  renewables to 23 percent of gross  final consumption of energy by  2020  The share of renewables  comprised 25.58 percent of  gross final consumption of  energy     129. In order to reduce dependency on imported fuel, sustainable development of ren ewable  energy sources was implemented in 2016. The strategic objectives set in the area of renewable  energy enabled r apid development the of local electricity generation  capacity  and energy from  renewable resources in Lithuania.   130. The Action Programme provides for the allocation of about EUR 37.5 million from EU  structural funds for activities for promoting energy efficiency and the use of energy from  renewables in 2017.   131. In 2017, the process of issuing permits to producing customers whose  installed capacity  of power -stations is up to 5 kW has been simplified. The list of technologies that can become  producing  consumers, including wind and biomass technologies, and a list of individuals providing  for the possibility of becoming producing co nsumers has been also expanded. Total installed  capacity for producing  customers has been increased up to 100 MW .  132. In 2017, the requirements of the legal acts regarding research and actions in the  exclusive economic zone of Lithuania – the Baltic Sea – were amended. These amendments  capacitate and permit of assessing the development of wind power plants in the territorial sea of  Lithuania. The Ministry of Energy, in co -operation with other institutions, will organize research  aimed at assessing the poss ibilities for the development of power plants using renewable energy  resources, operational costs and the efficiency of activities in the Baltic Sea .    Increasing the efficiency of final energy consumption     Table 7. Increasing the efficiency of final energy  consumption   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in 2016   To consume 20 percent less  final energy in comparison  with 2009 by 2020  To consume 17 percent less  final energy in comparison  with 2009 by 2020  Consumption of final energy  decreased by 2.3 percent compared  to 2010 (excluding the transport  sector)     133. In 2017, agreements with the largest state -owned energy companies on energy savings  for end -users were prepared and concluded. According to the agreements, the enterprises undertook  to save a total of 1.9 TWh of final energy. Also the Agreements with energ y suppliers on the 
33   provision of the information to consumers of final energy on energy efficiency improvement  measures, their impact and changing behaviour of consumers were approved. 48 agreements with  energy suppliers were concluded based on the aforemen tioned description .  134. 403 multi -apartment buildings were modernized under the Programme for the  Renovation (Modernization) of Multi -apartment Buildings. 682 individual instruments reducing  heat energy consumption were implemented in multi -apartment buil dings at the initiative of  residents. A total of 2 757 multi -apartment buildings (about 7.6 percent of all multi -apartment  buildings) have been renovated (since 2005), and 13 107  individual instruments reducing heat  energy consumption  have been implemented  in multi -apartment buildings at the initiative of  residents.   135 The rated consumption of heat energy in multi -apartment buildings built according to  the technical requirements for construction that were valid before 1993 was reduced by  approximately 846 GWh per year from 2005. Such reduction accounts for approximately 16.9  percent  compared to 2005 (5000 GWh) (the plan is to achieve at least 20 percent in 2020).   136. The plan is to modernize at least 500 multi -apartment buildings in 2018, thus the rated  consumption of heat energy should drop by another 100 GWh.     Restriction of greenhouse gas emissions     Table 8. Restriction of greenhouse gas emissions   EU 2020 target  National 2020 target  Situation in Lithuania in  2015   By 2020, to reduce  greenhouse gas (hereinafter -  GHG) emissions by 20  percent in comparison with  the level of 1990.   In sectors that are not a part  of the EU emission  allowance trading system, to  reduce GHG emissions by 10  percent compared to 2005  During the 2013 -2020 period, in  sectors tha t are not a part of the  EU emission allowance trading  system, every year not to exceed  the annual quantitative quotas  (hereinafter - tonnes of CO 2 eq.)  of GHG emissions set for  Lithuania and to ensure that GHG  emissions in 2020 increase by no  more than 15 percent compared  to 2005 and do not exceed 15.46  million tonnes of CO 2 eq. The quota of sectors that are  not a part of the EU emission  allowance trading system  comprised 14.019 million  tonnes of CO 2 eq. According  to the data of the National  Report on GHG E missions  Accounting of 2018, the actual  greenhouse gas emissions  totalled 13.780 mln. t CO 2 eq.    137. According to the Law on Financial Instruments of Climate Change Management, in  2017 about EUR 33.7 million was allocated for financing new projects for increasing energy  efficiency and the use of renewables (EUR 31.6 million), for the installation of renewable energy 
34   sources (EUR 1.5 million) and developing cooperation in order to transfer renewable energy source  technologies produced in Lithuania to third counties (EUR 0. 6 million).   138. In 2018, the funds from the S pecial Climate Change Programme will continue to be  used for financing projects the implementation whereof results in quantitative reduction of  greenhouse gas emissions. The plan is to allocate a total of EUR 32.5 million for projects aimed at  increasing e nergy efficiency and use of renewables in 2018.     CHAPTER V  INTERINSTITUTIONAL C OOPERATION     139. In the preparation of the Action P lan of the Implementation of Council   Recommendations for Lithuania for 2017 –2018 (hereinafter – the Action Plan) and the NRP, close  cooperation with both state authorities and social partners was continued.   140. The Action Plan was presented  in Committees of the Parliament: the Committee on  Social Affairs and Labour, the Committee on the European Affairs, the Committee on Education  and Science and the Committee on Culture. Pursuant to the Government Resolution  On  Coordination of the Implement ation of the Agenda of National Reforms in Lithuania, the Action  Plan was presented to the Government.   141. Country  Report published by the EC was discussed in the following Committees of the  Parliament: the Committee on European Affairs , the Committee on Environment  Protection, the  Committee on Social Affairs and Labour, the Committee on State Administration and Local  Authorities, the Committee on Audit, the Committee on Budget and Finances, the Committee on  Economy, the Committee on Education and Science,  and the Committee on Health Affairs.   142. The NRP was prepared in cooperation with the inter -institutional working group  composed of ministries, representatives of the Bank of Lithuania and Statistics Lithuania. The  Minister of Economy coordinated the pre paration of the NRP.  NRP was presented at the Parliament   Committee on European Affairs with the participation of other sectoral committees of the  Parliament .  143. The NRP project was publicly announced in the Information System of the Legislation  of the Parliament  Office. Comments and suggestions made by the economic -social partners and the  general public  were taken into consideration.  
