Policy Briefing   Algorithmic Impact   Assessments  Building a systematic framework of accountability  for algorithmic decision making   Putting people first
ContentsAlgorithmic Impact Assessments Written by  Stephanie Sheir Dora Meredith Dr Abigail Gilbert  Anna Thomas  With thanks to  Helen Mountfield QC  Dr David Leslie  Dr Logan Graham Dr Emre Kazim Associate Professor Reuben Binns Sa’ad Hossain QC   Published   November 2021Executive Summary  3 Introduction 4 What is an Algorithmic Impact Assessment? 4 Why do we need a systematic framework of  accountability for algorithmic decision-making? 4 Insights on Algorithmic Impact Assessments 5 Types of AIA models 7 1. The Questionnaire model 7  2. The DPIA model 7 3. The public agency model 8 When should an AIA be triggered?  9 Developing the AIA process 11 Identifying individuals and communities  who might be impacted 12 Lessons from Human Rights Impact Assessments 13 Undertaking an ex ante risk and impact analysis 14  Internal vs external audits  15 Quantitative vs qualitative impact assessment  16 Measurements of impact and identifying harms 16 Equality as a case study for risk and impact analysis  17 Taking appropriate action in response to the  ex ante analysis 18 Continuous evaluation to ensure assessment  and appropriate action is ongoing 19  Conclusion 20 Annexes 21 Annex 1: Draft amendments on AIAs 22 Annex 2: The Good Work Charter 26    Endnotes 27
 3 Algorithmic Impact Assessments  3 Institute for the Future of Work Executive Summary The National AI Strategy recognises  that the impact of AI on the UK and  the wider world will be profound over  the next decade. 1 Algorithmic systems  are increasingly used by Governments  and businesses to make automated,  data-driven decisions that are having  far-reaching consequences on work  and working people, business and  communities. Existing regimes for  regulation have been outpaced,  requiring new proposals to ensure  meaningful accountability, safeguard  fundamental values and shape  innovation in the public interest.  This policy paper proposes algorithmic  impact assessments as a systematic  framework of accountability for  algorithmic decision making to support  the next phase of the AI Strategy.  The UK Government recognises the  need to build on new algorithmic  transparency standards in the public  sector, 2 and is considering the merits  of a unified impact assessment as a  form of assurance for AI. 3 This briefing  analyses existing models and case  studies in the light of new evidence  about use of algorithmic systems at  work, highlighting key components to  inform new regulation. New evidence suggests that the UK  proposal should: → Establish a new corporate duty    to undertake, disclose and act   on pre-emptive Algorithmic Impact   Assessments (AIAs) in the public   interest. → Ensure that this duty applies   from the earliest stage of designing   algorithmic systems. → Mandate rigorous ex ante   assessment and ongoing evaluation   of risks, impacts and anticipated   impacts through deployment.   This requires compliance with four   essential planks for AIAs.  → Forefront assessment of impacts   on equality and good work on   people whose interests are likely to   be affected. → Enable future development of   context-specific protocols, guidance   and standardised techniques and   methods of evaluation, covering use   of algorithmic systems at work. The Institute for the Future of Work  focuses on the frontier of changes  to work but our insights and  recommendations are relevant to the  wider debate on AI governance and  regulation. At a global level, the UNESCO  Global Recommendations on the Ethics  of AI in November 2021 forefronts the  principles of human dignity, inclusive  growth and social justice. This invites  particular attention to the impacts of AI  on work – and provides a normative basis  for our framework of accountability.
 4 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Introduction Interest in algorithmic risk and impact  assessments is increasing, as evidence is  growing on the wide-ranging impacts that  algorithmic systems may have, including upon  access to, terms and conditions, and quality  of work. 4 This briefing introduces algorithmic  impact assessments as a systematic framework  of accountability for algorithmic decisionmaking and decision support systems. Based  on analysis of existing tools and case studies  in the light of new research, 5 we propose a  regulatory framework that integrates individual  and systemic approaches to accountability.  Our proposal could shape the forthcoming  AI White Paper, extend the remit of the Online  Harms Bill or—as we propose is best—trigger  a new, overarching Accountability for Algorithms  Act. 6 It also informs the Government’s current  consultation on the GDPR: Data, a new  direction. 7    This briefing builds on recent national and  international work on algorithmic accountability  from the Ethics Team at the Alan Turing  Institute, 8 Ada Lovelace Institute workshops,  the CDEI’s Bias Review 9 and APPG on the Future  of Work’s inquiry into the New Frontier. 10  Draft amendments for potential legislation (V1)  are attached at Annex 1, based on the insights  in this paper.      The Institute for the Future of Work focuses on  the changing world of work. Work is the thread  that connects people’s everyday experience  with their communities, the economy and  the state, public policy and private ventures.  Addressing the challenges and opportunities  of algorithmic systems at work is key in its own  right, but a deep-dive into the work context  acts as a lens to understand the implications of  automated decision-making in multiple high  stakes environments. Recent emphasis in  AI Ethics on the social and economic impacts  of algorithmic systems highlight the particular  significance of considering the consequences  for work and working people, suggesting policy  and legislation must specifically consider  this context.  Our goal is to inform legislation to shape  innovation in the public interest, safeguard our  fundamental values and bring accountability to  the algorithmic systems increasingly shaping  people’s work and lives.  What is an Algorithmic Impact Assessment?  An algorithmic impact assessment (‘AIA’)  should be seen as an overarching approach as well as a procedure, for risk management  and accountability. An AIA focuses on key  decision-making points in the design and  deployment of an algorithmic system, requiring  careful assessment of risks and impacts before  real-world use. Understanding risks, and taking  reasonable and proportionate steps in response  to this new insight, should ensure these  socio-technical systems are human-centred  and accountable, reducing adverse impacts and  maximising benefits for people and society as a  whole. AIAs are conceptualised and practiced  very differently by companies, academics and  policy makers, with the concept used to describe  a range of accountability tools and processes  across the spectrum of soft to hard governance.  An AIA should integrate the technical, human,  organisational and social elements of evaluation  over time. It should allow for different methods  and measures for their evaluation, as well as  use of the full range of emerging tools for the  governance of the AI ecosystem, including  bias audits, regulatory inspection, voluntary  algorithmic impact assessments and public  transparency initiatives. 11 AIAs can, and should,  be applied to advance defined goals, such as  the principle that AI should promote people’s  wellbeing. Why do we need a systematic framework  of accountability for algorithmic  decision-making? The introduction of an AIA framework across  the technology lifecycle could provide a unified  approach to accountability for algorithmic  decision making and a standardised mechanism  to enable performance of the assessment  in practice. Evidence in the work context 
 5 Policy Briefing Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work demonstrates that technical approaches  commonly deployed by technology  companies before deployment of algorithmic  systems are inadequate. 12 Socio-technical  approaches are needed which recognise and  make explicit the human decisions that take  place both before deployment, and within  institutional contexts from conception of the  system. AIAs could be applied broadly, from  identifying harms, to shaping the design of  an automated system, to enabling action in  response to an impact assessment. In the UK, policymakers are committed to a  regulatory framework that offers meaningful  accountability for algorithmic systems  deployed in both private and public sectors  and are considering AIAs. 13 The framework  should be guided by overarching principles  and duties, supported by detailed guidance  from the regulators, and at a sectoral  level. This approach recognises a range  of real and potential impacts that may  be widely allocated and not immediately  ascertainable, as new research in the work  context demonstrates. 14 An AIA framework  should combine and supplement the best  of existing impact assessments, including  those for data protection, equality and  human rights.  With clear goals and essential standards  established for evaluation, the AIA should  enable articulation, better measurement and  stronger accountability for such a range of  impacts; shape design to take these impacts  into account from conception through the  technology life cycle; improve multi-layered  transparency and explanation through  record-keeping; enable context-appropriate  response in ways which apply established  principles; and allow for ongoing evaluation  and improved iterations as practice,  guidance and case law builds.  Given the relative infancy of existing  initiatives globally, 15 the UK is well-placed  to combine strengths in innovation and  governance and lead in this crucial policy  field to shape the global conversation on  AI regulation and governance.Insights on Algorithmic  Impact Assessments Our review points to the following insights on  building a systematic regulatory framework for  accountability grounded in algorithmic impact  assessments: → Overarching principles should offer direction   and normative baselines for evaluation by AIAs.   These should be combined with procedural   and substantive duties. → Primary legislation should specify essential   requirements needed to fulfil the new AIA   duties but not how these should be fulfilled.   Regulation must allow for context-specific   response as sectoral guidance is developed to   avoid or ameliorate specific harms. → The AIA framework should span the value chain   and innovation cycle, from concept, through   design, procurement, deployment and any   changes in use. Assessment must be dynamic   and rigorous.  → The framework should not focus on the model,   or on content, in a way that might restrict or   obscure examination of any other part of   evaluating a complex algorithmic system or the   practices behind their production, deployment,   and use.  → Mechanisms to pinpoint actors and   stakeholders, and construct a system for   ongoing engagement, are necessary to perform   accurate ex ante and ex post facto evaluation   of real-life impacts. This would ‘future proof’   the model by allowing for the discovery of   new impacts.  → Boosted capacity and resources would enable   the DCRF and regulators to investigate, certify   and attach conditions to use of algorithmic   systems and to run AIA sandboxes to inform   guidance.  → Existing regulatory requirements such as   requirements for human rights, equality and   data protection impact assessments, should    be incorporated within the AIA ‘umbrella. ’ 16  → Impacts on good work need explicit attention   in regulation and subsequent guidance.  
Human beings and  organisations that use  machines of this kind  have to take responsibility.  If we don’t design the future  we want,  the future will be  designed by accident.  Helen Mountfield QC, Expert in constitutional, human rights and equality law 6 Quote taken from the APPG report,  The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work
 7 Three primary models of AIAs have been  identified in the literature: the Questionnaire  Model, the Data Protection Impact Assessment  (DPIA) model and the Public Agency Model. 17  Here, we describe the models and highlight key  challenges and lessons learnt from each one.   Model 1   The Questionnaire Model   The questionnaire model involves an AIA  completed in question and answer format for  public sector AI applications, and is reflected  in the approach taken by Canada’s Directive on  Automated Decision-Making 2019, stipulating  that government agencies must complete an AIA before deployment of an automated  decision-making system (ADS). The questions  used by the Canadian AIA include motivation  behind and the need for automation, as well  as the degree of explanation and human  involvement in the system. A point scoring  system is then used to create an assessment  of risk level. This model employs questions  that are fairly simple and invites short or  yes/no answers rather than detailed  statements or assessments. Although only three AIAs have been published  pursuant to the Directive in Canada, with 12  further assessments expected for publication  shortly, the Treasury Board of Canada  Secretariat (TBCS) reports that undertaking the  process has been helpful to raise awareness,  identify challenges and enable a reflective  exercise to consider the real purpose and  intended outcomes. Making set requirements,  without specifying the methodology, works  well. Details of the assessment were not always  reported to the public when they could be, and  this might allay concerns. Peer review, triggered by higher risk  environments, was helpful to deepen the  evaluation. Other relevant assessments, such as  a privacy assessment for data processing or the  Canadian GBA+ -gender based analysis, have  been included by adding specific questions to  elicit these assessments. Impacts on work are  not currently part of the assessment but the  TBCS recognises this is a notable gap.  The Canadian questionnaire model is  light but some features appear to be  working well, in particular the tiered  approach to requirements as risk  increases, peer review and incorporation  of other assessments required by law.  A wider review of impacts is needed. Model 2   The DPIA Model   Data protection impact assessments (DPIAs),  mandated in GDPR for data processing that is  likely to result in a high risk to individuals,  could serve as a model for an AIA. DPIAs as a  governance mechanism are currently under  review. 18 Although DPIAs are aimed at protecting  people from risks arising as a result of data  processing, rather than algorithmic decision  making, the focus in the GDPR on automated  decision making, impact assessment and  procedures for risk mitigation are instructive, noting the high levels of data processing  ordinarily involved in ADS. 19 The overarching  principles of GDPR, including those of  fairness, transparency, purpose limitation  and accountability, offer overall direction.  The principle of ‘data protection by design’  is a novel feature that explicitly requires  consideration of data protection principles at  concept and design stages. The Information  Commissioner’s Office (ICO) recognises the need  for an update of its employment practices code,  which is underway. 20Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Types of AIA models
 8 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Disclosure and external review of DPIAs are not  required (although some responsible employers  have started to disclose DPIAs on a voluntary  basis) 21 leading the DPIA model to fall short on  public engagement. Without such disclosure  and transparency about the fact, purpose and remit of an ADS, it is difficult for people  to understand or engage with relevant  decisions. 22 Although Article 35 (9) stipulates  that data controllers ought to seek the views  of data subjects where appropriate, there is  no collective or individualised due process  relating to this requirement under GDPR. 23 The  limitations of DPIAs have been noted in terms of  promoting accountability and ensuring fairness  in the work context. 24 The ICO is producing  dedicated guidance to address the challenges of  new and pervasive AI applications. 25  The principle-based framework of the  DPIA offers a sound model for AIAs.  The principle of ‘data protection by  design’ is instructive. Well-recognised  limits of DPIAs, including disclosure,  remit and stakeholder engagement  could be addressed by legislating for  an overarching AIA.  Model 3   The Public Agency Model    The most comprehensive AIA model is the public  agency model that formalises relationships of  accountability between public agencies to the  public and to regulators, through the ongoing  exercise of transparency, stakeholder dialogue  and regulatory compliance. 26 Its primary  elements have been proposed and endorsed by  the European Parliamentary Research Service  (EPRS). The public agency model involves a number of  ex ante risk assessment procedures of varying  levels of stringency. Unlike DPIAs, the public  agency model features a great degree of public  engagement, both through the disclosure  of information, solicitation of feedback and Policy Briefing  due process challenge period for impacted  communities. 27 This approach could be adapted  to differing levels of AI risk, types of organisation  and accountability requirements, and for the  private sector. Research on use of algorithmic  systems at work points to the erosion of sharp  distinctions between the private and public  sectors, given design and procurement of AI  systems tend to originate in the private sector. 28  The public agency model has not been applied  to work or private applications to date.  The public agency model points to the  advantages of establishing an ongoing  process for evaluation, alongside wider  consultation, that would enable dynamic  and responsive monitoring of impacts and  harms. The pre-emptive procedures and  tiered approach outlined are instructive. The structure and requirements of most  AIA models derive from existing public  interest impact assessments, particularly  data protection and human rights (‘HRIA’).  These assessments share a number of  components designed to measure the impacts  of ADS against predetermined metrics and to  create accountability through the formalisation  of relationships between corporations, affected  stakeholders and regulatory forums. AIAs can  either be required through legislative mandate,  solicited voluntarily as a function of reputational  or corporate responsibility-based concerns,  or in response to proven harms. 29
9 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing   Precise risk thresholds for the initiation of  an AIA are an area of practical concern, as  case studies in the work context show. 30  Risk thresholds represent a gap in the literature,  as scholars make almost no reference to  requirements for triggering an AIA.  The proposed Algorithmic Accountability Act  2019 31 in the United States requires AIAs when  ADS are implemented which affect certain  sensitive domains of people’s lives. Similarly,  the EU AI Act employs thresholds of risk, and  the ongoing work of the Council of Europe’s Ad  hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence (CAHAI)  has stressed a general need to for a ‘risk-based  approach’ to determine where and when an  AIA is appropriate. Generally, ‘high risk’ or  ‘sensitive’ processing is said to involve impacts  on the legal or other interests of individuals,  processing of personal data, or would otherwise  have ‘significant effects’ on a person’s life  circumstances, especially where vulnerable  individuals are involved. This would include  impacts on access to work, pay, terms and  conditions and quality of work. 32  The Canadian model requires completion of an  AIA if an ADS is used to recommend or make any  administrative decisions in the public sector,  including when used as support for human  decision-makers. 33 Although this classification  is broad, the Treasury Board of Canada  Secretariat (TBCS) report that, in practice, AIAs  are required for ADS which make decisions  about individuals, impacting on their rights,  access to services or regulatory action. 34  The use of ADS for automating workflows that  do not target individuals or corporations are  not currently within scope of the Directive,  although the TBCS are actively seeking to  extend it to require consideration of impacts  on work in light of recent evidence on impacts.  The TBCS report that all published and ongoing  AIAs have been assessed as risk 2/3, with  neither low nor high risk cases recognised.  When should an AIA be triggered?    Guidance refining the risk-based approach  taken by DPIAs in Article 35 of GDPR offers  some inspiration, notwithstanding criticism for  requiring too high and uncertain a threshold for  assessment, leading to inconsistent application.  DPIAs are required when personal data  processing is likely to result in a ‘high risk’ to an  individual’s fundamental rights and freedoms. 35  The EDB has confirmed this means decisions  that ‘significantly affect’ individuals including  decisions that affect the circumstances of  the individual for a prolonged period, and  financial impacts. This means that decisions  about recruitment, pay, work allocation, terms  and conditions would all be covered, as IFOW  analysis demonstrates. 36 Less obvious uses  which impact on job quality include social  scoring in recruitment algorithms, systematic  monitoring, the use of biometric data and/ or location-based tracking, all of which meet  definitions of high risk outlined by ICO and  Article 29 Working Party guidance. 37  Fundamentally, the initiation of an AIA must  accord with an understanding of how and  when an ADS can be appropriately adjusted  or its harms mitigated, before significant or  irreversible elements are put into place. 38 Examination of ‘triggers’ suggest that AIAs  should be routinely undertaken in work  context and whenever there is a risk of  impact on access, fundamental conditions,  or the nature of work. Given particular  challenges raised by AI, including the  scale, reach, and predictive capacity of AI  applications, 39 there are strong grounds  for requiring an AIA for any use of AI in  a work environment. In such sensitive  environments, the value of a risk-based  threshold is limited. AIA triggers invite  specific attention and guidance from the  regulators in any event, once legislators  establish an appropriate threshold in  principle.
Companies should be  required and encouraged  to consider and remedy  any adverse impacts as  soon as possible in the  innovation cycle, not  post event.  The opportunity  is for the UK to do better,  and lead globally.  Tabitha Goldstaub, Chair of the UK Government’s AI Council Quote taken from the APPG report,  The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work10
11 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Recognising how these human choices  determine impacts is critical to overcoming  the regulatory lacuna in governance,  particularly in the AI context. There is a lack  of clarity in popular writings on the character  of the AI “black box” . On the one hand, this  refers to the proprietary protectionism of  firms that are attempting to safeguard their  intellectual property by not disclosing details  about their software and computer code.  This intentional lack of transparency is often  cast as financially prudent and strategically  necessary in competitive innovation  environments. But it may also be used to set  up unjustifiable roadblocks to sensible  regulatory oversight and evade reasonable  expectations about public-facing assurance  of fair practices. Overall approach  Although the models for AIAs vary in focus and  comprehensiveness, AIAs generally conform to  a 4-stage process. 40 This section explores these  stages in more detail, drawing out insights from  applications at work to inform the details of our  regulatory model. Impacts from algorithmic systems are  determined by human decisions throughout  the entire life-cycle of a product. 41 Some  impacts will be better detected before, or after,  the product is deployed, as analysis in the  work context demonstrates. While impacts on  equality can be significantly shaped by human  decisions in product development, 42 impacts  on broader dimensions of good work—such  as learning, dignity and autonomy— may only  become visible through choices made during  implementation.  Identifying individuals  and communities who  might be impacted Undertaking and ex ante  risk and impact analysis Taking appropriate  action in response to  the ex ante analysisContinuous evaluation  to ensure assessment  and appropriate action is  ongoing and responsiveFigure 1: The 4 stage AIA processDeveloping the AIA process
12 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Stage 1   Identifying individuals and  communities who might be  impacted    Stage 1 of an AIA consists of identifying  those who might be impacted by automated  decision-making.  Proposals regarding procedures for identifying  impacted groups are sparse in the AIA  literature. 45 The Alan Turing Institute suggests  employing a ‘stakeholder impact assessment’  which identifies affected stakeholders in the  first instance, by considering which groups  and individuals are negatively impacted  by the ADS, with particular attention to the  most vulnerable. 46 The use of ‘Human Impact  Statements’ has also been suggested, involving   comparative population analysis of impact. 47  Potentially impacted populations and their  status-based categories, such as race and  gender, are identified, before the potential  impact of uncertainty or statistical error on  these sub-populations is assessed. 48 This  methodology sketches out how impact on  relevant populations ought to be considered but  falls short of pinpointing the relevant affected  communities.On the other hand, the AI “black box” refers  to the barriers to understanding that complex  algorithms pose. This kind of opaqueness  may lead to the setting up of a different sort of   obstacle to regulatory intervention as human  agency is ceded to “smarter” machine learning   systems. This perspective is not supported by  the literature: human decisions determine the  design objectives of even the most advanced  machine learning tools. It also invites active  consideration of the type and rationale for  opacity, of which scholars have identified 6  main categories. 44Defining the  outcome 1Choosing the  variables 3Embedding your AI model  7Choosing your  AI model 5 Identifying  data sources2 Choosing  optimisation  criteria6 Assembling  the training  data4Figure 2: Key decision-making points 43 Making  adjustments10 Choosing your  auditing tool  and method8Evaluating results 9
13 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Once relevant impacted populations have  been identified, engagement with these  communities can take place. Types of  community engagement procedures include  public comment periods, focus groups, surveys  and representative boards. 49 In the literature,  community engagement is largely addressed  through reference to engagement with the  wider public through public disclosure of  information, with less reference to engagement  with impacted communities, however defined.  Typically, communities of interest are framed in  broad terms, such as the consumer or citizen, as  opposed to workers or algorithmic subjects.  Lessons from Human Rights Impact  Assessments (HRIAs) Identification of affected stakeholders has  received more treatment in the human rights  literature, especially through Human Rights  Impact Assessments (HRIAs), which are  gaining traction in popularity and attention. 50  In guidance on conducting HRIAs, the UN  highlights the methodology of impact zoning,  which seeks to identify individuals affected at  each stage of business projects. 51   Impact zoning involves the following steps: i)  Sketching of key design components of the   project that may cause social or   environmental impacts. These impacts give   rise to ‘impact zones’ . ii)  Identify and overlay broad stakeholder   groups over the impact zones.  iii) Consult with stakeholder representatives   and verify which groups are affected by   which impacts.  iv) Further consideration of particularly   vulnerable groups by identifying the groups   which may be disproportionately affected by   business activities due to their disadvantaged   status.These guidelines are sparse in detail, probably  because identification of affected groups is a  highly context-dependent exercise. However,  the broad principles of the identification of  disadvantaged groups and consultation with  stakeholder representatives and are instructive  for the design of AIAs. 52  Identifying the individuals and communities  who might be impacted will also form the  basis for multi-stakeholder engagement  and participation through the process of  assessment. 53  The identification of affected communities,  particularly the most vulnerable, represent   a gap in the literature. More needs to be  done on the design of methodologies to  identify the relevant impacted individuals  and communities of automated decisionmaking, with lessons to be drawn from  human rights impact procedures.
14 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Stage 2   Undertaking an ex ante risk and  impact analysis    The second stage of the AIA is a risk and impact  analysis undertaken before deployment of  the ADS.  IFOW case studies and literature review  demonstrate that analysis should start with  an overview of the system including its  purpose, scope, intended use and potential  implementation timeline. In the work  context, this has been shown to be necessary  to encourage thoughtful use, understand  impacts and avoid work places becoming  sites of experimentation. 54 A clear definition  allows the developer to clarify the preliminary  details of an ADS, including which parts of the  greater workflow are automated and which are  human-controlled, overseen or supervised.  In practice, a statement of purpose setting out  the capabilities, remit and proposed outcome  may be more useful to many stakeholders than  technical details surrounding data, variables or  the model, although in-depth assessment will  need full access to the model. 55  Next, the analysis is implemented through either  an internal  self-assessment of the system or an  external  commissioned assessment conducted  by a third-party organisation to evaluate  potential impacts on stakeholders, such as  inaccuracy, bias and other harms.  Although there is no universal methodology  for conducting the risk and impact analysis, we  have identified common elements in proposed  AIA frameworks, including the use of internal or  external auditing, quantitative and qualitative  methodologies, and various measurements  of impact. As impact is contextually defined,  metrics and thresholds of risk and impact may  vary. Public disclosure of information could  be hindered by opaque language by entities  seeking to fulfil compliance requirements  without being fully transparent. 56  The model of ‘datasheets for datasets’ promotes  transparency through the accompaniment of  datasets with information sheets on dataset  motivation, composition, intended uses and  so forth. 57 To maximise the effectiveness of  disclosure of information, so that appropriate  courses of action can be undertaken by the  appropriate actors, a tiered system of public  disclosure has been proposed, where layman’s  summaries giving prescribed information are  released to the public, while sensitive and  detailed technical information may be withheld  or redacted until a permitted request for  further information is made, or the regulator  requests it. 58 The entity should publish the purpose,  scope, intended use of the ADS. The entity  should also disclose and explain the  approach adopted; stakeholders affected  or likely to be affected; impacts mitigated,  and those addressed; and basic details  about the AIA process itself. The step  must be aimed at identifying pre-emptive  actions.
15 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Internal vs external audits Internal auditing  is conducted by individuals  internal to the organisation, who have full  access to the models, training data and key  employees. 59 Insiders may sometimes be the  best candidates for early detection of problems  in the development of ADS. 60 As established  norms in the algorithmic auditing world are  sparse, there is high variance in the depth  and quality of internal auditing. Raji proposes  an end-to-end internal auditing framework,  intended for integration with product life  cycles, that bears much resemblance to the  public agency model. 61 Raji’s framework  stresses the inclusion of internal knowledge  and documentation, such as the principles,  values and ethical objectives embodied in the  development process.  Article 43 of the proposed EU AI Act mandates  internally conducted ex ante risk assessments  by providers of high-risk systems only, as part  of the conformity assessment procedure.  Although elements of the public agency model  have been incorporated, including disclosing  the purpose of the system, methods and key  design choices, conformity assessments have  been roundly criticised for having inconsistent  thresholds, overreliance on internal auditing,  and paying inadequate attention to those  affected by AI systems. 62 Article 61 mandates  post-market monitoring plans. As a general  heuristic, internal auditing incurs less external  credibility but may grant better access, while  external auditing grants less access but more  robust external accountability. 63   External auditing  involves a third party auditor  who is able to access parts of the ADS such  as the outputs and the backend. 64 This can  be done by the regulator or by a contracted  third party. Regulators must be permitted to  undertake full investigations with access to  source codes, training datasets, methodologies,  processes and techniques, as highlighted in  IFOW’s Machine Learning Case Studies. 65  The regulators must also be able to undertake  the range of technical and non-technical audits and ongoing monitoring themselves, including  code, scraping and API audits, as highlighted by  the Ada Lovelace Institute and Reset. 66   Legislative norms and requirements for third  party auditors could establish a healthy  ecosystem for external AIAs and audits 67 by  specifying bottom lines and level of access to  encourage high standards, formalise external  access privileges and prevent adversarial  behaviour on the part of organisations.  This ecosystem must enable such assessment  by non-profit independent academic labs  and civil society organisations, as well as the  private sector. The specification dilemma has  been coined to illustrate the invocation of  model parameters to counter the findings of  external auditors, who may not be granted  full access to internal design specifications.  However, authorised bodies could be granted  full access on terms, which may enhance  both accountability and reach to support  innovation. 68  In practice, key human decision making stages 69   will sit across varied organisations. In this  context different parts of an impact assessment  will be conducted ‘internally’ or ‘externally’ .  Transparency and cooperation obligations  across the supply chain will be required so that  requests for relevant information or to make  reasonable adjustments can be implemented. 70 There are advantages of internal audits,  but legislation must enable high quality,  independent, external audits. Given  current limitations of both, new  requirements for auditing as part of the  AIA must be combined with additional  investigative powers to ensure regulators  have full access to all relevant information  and may undertake technical and  non-technical interrogation where  appropriate. A duty to cooperate and  provide information relevant to  performance of the new AIA obligations  will be needed.  
16 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Quantitative vs qualitative impact assessment      Types of audit, metrics and methodological  approach abound. 71 Some variables, and  interpretations of fairness, are better suited to  quantification but methodological variables  cannot and should not delimit the scope of  impact assessment. Broadly, audits can be  differentiated by their quantitative or qualitative  leanings.  Quantitative ex ante audits  are typically  conducted to test the accuracy of models  and frame subjective questions of ‘bias’ , or  comparative outcomes between groups,  as statistical metrics. 72 Quantitative audits  are typically performed following system  deployment (if at all) but can be delivered  ex ante through using simulated testing  environments or examining prior use cases. 73  IFOW’s AI and Hiring paper and the CDEI  Bias Review identify the limitations and  inconsistencies of technical auditing in isolation,  as well as the need for consistent, open  and shared approaches to addressing bias,  fairness and inequality. Particular attention  must be given to auditing for equality, based  on a comprehensive understanding of how  this is distinct from ‘bias’ in relation to data  processing. 74 Qualitative ex ante audits  involve the collection  of qualitative data from developers, users and  affected communities to draw a more holistic  picture of impact. Information that could be  obtained from organisations and development  teams include justifications, assumptions, aims,  wider organisation processes and culture, in  the form of statements, declarations, interviews  and ethnographic methodologies. 75 The use of  qualitative data is intended to distil quantitative  information such as model parameters and  data processing in a descriptive, plain-language  format, as well as to uncover the reasoning and  assumptions behind developer decision-making.  This points the need for guidance allowing  variation in levels of assessment according  to the severity of risk and harm under  consideration.Several scholars propose an approach of  rigorously examined alternatives, such as  alternative variables, methods of assessment  and mitigation, including the alternative of  taking no action. 76 The sketching of alternatives  is intended to allow external reviewers a greater  understanding of the available options at hand  to contextualise developer decision-making.  Both quantitative and qualitative methods  must be part of an effective AIA. Auditing  for equality needs particular mention and  attention in new regulation.  Measurements of impact and identifying harms A variety of processes and impacts across  the lifecycle of the ADS can be evaluated to  produce risk assessments. Six primary types  of transparency have been identified, which  could constitute different parts or types of risk  assessment. 77 Disclosures should therefore  include explanations of decision rationale;  responsibility and chains of development,  management and implementation; data and  how it has been used for decision-making;  fairness, including procedures to mitigate  bias and assessment of whether individuals  have received equal treatment; safety and  performance, primarily in reference to technical  indices such as accuracy and robustness; and  impact, including monitoring procedures and  impacts on individuals or society.  The definition and analysis of impact and harm  on affected communities does not have strong  norms and are likely to be subject to normative  contestation. Ultimately, defining harm is  a normative exercise with little regulatory  precedent. 78 There is a lack of a universal  definition of fairness, for example, and there  are trade-offs and conflicts between differing  statistical interpretations of fairness, as well as  between desirable outcomes such as fairness  and accuracy. 79 This suggests normative  uncertainty around ‘fairness’ , pointing to  the need for both qualitative auditing and  participatory mechanisms to enable normative  evaluation and analysis of risk and impact. 
17 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  In the light of this, the EPRS recommends  focusing on allocative and representational  harms. 80   Identifying potential harms through  international human rights standards has been  proposed 81 and there is growing interest in  mandating human rights impact assessment  as part of AIAs. 82 Our review suggests that  human rights impact assessments may offer a  familiar lens through which to start identifying  impacts, noting that many common harms  derive from a rights-based framework. The Alan  Turing Institute has made detailed proposals to  inform best practice, which would support this  approach. 83 However, it is not exhaustive and  may miss some collective and intersectional  harms. This means that assessment should  start with evaluation of impacts on human  rights, equality of opportunity and disparity of  outcome, and go on to consider other impacts  that may not be caught by a human-rights  based approach, such as security of information  when data processing is not involved, and  socio-economic and place-based disadvantage.  It can be challenging to identify the origins  and source of adverse impacts, especially when  ADS tend to have complex supply chains. 84  Where proxies are used to classify individuals,  mixed expertise is required to identify how  such proxies might be enacting bias. This is  why qualitative ex ante auditing is important  for uncovering intentions, assumptions and  purposes of a system.  The assessment should start with  evaluation of risks and impacts on equality  of opportunity, disparity of outcome and  human rights. It should go on to consider  safety, privacy and security, and then  impacts on work. Subsequent monitoring  should enable identification of new or  unforeseen impacts.IFOW research suggests that the harms that  are most relevant in a work context are those  deriving from legal and socio-economic rights  and principles established under national and  international law, applied and synthesised in  the Good Work Charter. 85 These are protected in  the European Social Charter and International  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural  Rights, among other legal instruments. 86  A sharp focus on work is also consistent with  a recent emphasis on the social and economic  implications of algorithmic systems in AI  Ethics. We note that some measures for wider  dimensions of work quality have already been  developed, for example wellbeing measures in  relation to auditing autonomous systems. 87  The Charter could therefore be used as a checklist  of impacts on work, with metrics developed  to combine these approaches (rights-based,  social and economic interests and wellbeing  measures). Standardised metrics, methods and  techniques can be developed over time. 88  Equality as a case study for risk and impact  analysis AI at Work offers huge potential to understand  and correct historic patterns of inequality, if  this is prioritised as an objective within the AIA  framework. However, AI models are trained on  data that reflects past patterns of behaviour  and allocations of resource, and can therefore  project these patterns of inequality into the  future at an unprecedented scale and pace,  unless this is consciously corrected for. 89   While research on the best approach and  methods to counter the reproduction of  inequalities is in progress, current work broadly  supports a three step process to identifying  and mitigating relevant risks to equality of  opportunity and outcome on individuals and  groups. 90 These steps should be integrated  into the AIA process. The literature suggests  that there are several, viable approaches  to assessment for each step, which point to  regulation setting a broad goal and matters  which must be considered. Precise definitions,  remit or methodology should be disclosed  but not mandated, and detailed guidance  must follow. 
18 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Stage 3   Taking appropriate action in  response to the ex ante analysis    Both the literature review and case studies  point to the importance of establishing a  process for AIAs aimed at enabling appropriate  mitigation. Existing tools have not been built  for this purpose, which points to the need for  clear regulation, with better tools and guidance  to support practical applications. 93 This should  start with requirements for such a process, and  the formulation of a plan. There is a sound case  for this to allow access to external researchers,  in both the technical and social science fields,  to review the system once it is deployed. 94   Public engagement may help identify priorities,  routes and trade-offs, enabled through public  comment periods and external researcher  review. 95 The organisation could publish the  AIA as a single document with one subsequent  participation period, or divide the process into  separate publication and participation periods,  structured according to the public agency  model components (definition, disclosure,  self-assessment/external audit and meaningful  access). In response to public or stakeholder  comment, the organisation can make further  reasonable adjustments to the ADS model or  organisation policies to address concerns. The public agency model invites release of  the final version of the AIA, allowing for public  challenge in the case of failure or inadequacy to  mitigate issues raised in the public participation  period. A due process challenge period should  be implemented where the public, particularly  affected communities, have a further  opportunity to bring concerns to an oversight  body, regulatory agency, or in the courts if none  or insufficient action is taken. 96Firstly, risks, impacts and anticipated impacts  on groups with shared protected characteristics  would be examined. This reflects the current  approach in rights-based frameworks, in  particular the Equality Act, as highlighted by  Robin Allen QC and Dee Masters. 91   Secondly, the AIA would require due regard  to the desirability of reducing inequalities  of outcome resulting from socio-economic  and place-based disadvantage, given  well-established limitations of assessing  equality only by reference to single, protected  characteristics, as recognised in the CDEI’s  Bias Review. 92 The model in s1 Equality Act  is instructive here.   Lastly, a wider review would be made in  response to evidence emerging from the  participatory forums and unrestricted by  specific, anticipated outcomes. Future-proof  regulation must allow for assessment and  response to new and unexpected impacts.      New AI capabilities invite an additional  requirement when mitigation is  considered: to actively consider the  merits of reducing inequalities resulting  from socio-economic or place-based  disadvantage. Existing legal models,  combined with requirements  for participatory mechanisms, offer  alternatives to requiring proof of  causation.
19 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Policy Briefing  Stage 4   Continuous evaluation to ensure  assessment and appropriate  action is ongoing    The final stage of the AIA is to ensure continuous  evaluation. Various forms of impact will only  be identifiable once a system is deployed in  practice. For this reason, the recommendation  of ongoing monitoring of algorithmic systems  is a near-universal recommendation amongst  scholars. Once new impacts are identified,  new mitigations should be put in place.  This approach recognises a wide range of  potential impacts, which may be evaluative,  representative widely allocated. Research on the  ‘gigification’ of work suggests that these may  only become apparent over time and can be  profound, observed across all 10 dimensions of  good work. 102  Establishing a mechanism for ongoing  evaluation will enable participatory and reflexive  exercises to deepen understanding of impacts  and potential mitigative measures that are  responsive to the context at hand. 103 This will  enable improved iterations of the assessment  as practice, guidance and caselaw builds on  conducting AIAs in the public interest. IFOW case studies and the literature suggests  that an AIA process should be dynamic and  renewed in their entirety on a regular basis, such  as every year or two years, and when there is a  change of purpose or remit of the algorithmic  system. 104 Machine Learning case studies  suggest that specific triggers should include: 105 → Any ‘further processing’ of data; → Any new third party interactions; → Any change of use within the system,   which employers should persistently track; → Any addition of new datasets/sources.The literature points to the particular challenges  of establishing causation for representational  and allocative harms, in particular, where large  numbers of people and entities are involved. 97  This challenge could be addressed in regulation  by drawing on the legal model of contributory  negligence, where there is a wide measure of  judicial discretion to explore factors relevant to  causation and apportion ‘just and equitable’  compensation in the circumstances of the  case. 98 Relevant facts and material would have  to be considered, subject to caveat of availability  if reasonable steps are taken to obtain it, an  approach which draws from the UK’s model  of judicial review. 99 The recent landmark case  on environmental harms is also instructive,  pointing to the importance of actual and  imputed knowledge, and of published guidance,  by the UN in the case of Shell. 100    This points to the value for business, as well  as stakeholders, in establishing a thorough  process and transparent, effective mechanisms  to enable consultation and wider evidencegathering so that harms and other impacts  are understood, identified and considered  in practice, followed by context-specific  adjustments. Reasonable adjustments should  take into account the resources and capabilities  of an organisation, alongside proximity to  the harm and its severity, as modelled by the  law requiring reasonable adjustments for  disability. 101 Detailed guidance on matters to  be taken into account and trade-offs should  follow, once the principle is established.  Overall, adjustments should advance  application of the overarching principles. Adjustments and other steps should be  reasonable and proportionate. They should  take into account resources, capabilities,  the severity and proximity to the harm  under consideration.
20 As a practical response to  this deficit of responsible  foresight, I implore you to  consider  mandating regimes  of impact assessment.  Dr David Leslie, Ethics Theme Lead at The Alan Turing Institute Quote from the APPG on the  Future of Work’s inquiry into the New Frontier.
21 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work As algorithmic systems are increasingly used by governments and businesses to  make automated, data-driven decisions, legislation must not only keep pace with  these changes but future-proof mechanisms for accountability and shape future  directions in the public interest.  This proposal comes at a time when global agreement on AI Ethics marked by  the UNESCO guidance this month provides a normative basis for codification of  a principle-based framework in regulation grounded in new duties to undertake  and act on AIAs. Based on insight from the world of work, our briefing has shown  why and how AIAs could become an overarching framework for the assurance and  accountability of algorithmic decision making and support systems. This approach  would allow the UK Government to achieve the vision of the AI Strategy and lead  in setting global standards for the development of responsible technology in the  work place and beyond. Conclusion
22 Annexes
23 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Annex 1    Draft amendments on AIAs106  Statement of purpose (1) Any organisation applying a relevant algorithmic above must make a statement of purpose   including   (a) a summary description of the algorithmic system  (b) its capabilities, remit and proposed applications   (c) how to access further information  (2)  The statement of purpose made under (1) should be available   (a) in public annual and regulatory reports  (b) on request of any person or group of persons with a relevant interest, right or freedom (3)  An organisation applying a relevant algorithmic system must notify a person and any designated  representatives of the statement of purpose where any decision has been made concerning:  (a) hiring and access to work  (b) pay or work allocation  (c) monitoring or evaluation of performance   (d) discipline or termination of work Tiers of disclosure  (1) A party should record documentation relevant to development, procurement and/or application   of an algorithmic system including   (a) the identification of third parties contracted   (b) the outcome proposed  (c) the programming, training methodologies and data used  (d) the techniques used to test and validate the system  (e) the variables and weighting of variables selected to predict, rank or classify the outcome   (f) any trade offs between different measures and given rationale  (g) any organisational policies and processes relevant to procurement and applications of          the system   (2) person with a relevant interest, right or freedom may request a summary statement of the  matters documented under a, b and g at any time after deployment of the system (3) On receipt of a summary statement, a person or designated representative of a group of persons   with a relevant interest, right or freedom may request a written explanation of how the summary   statement under s2 applies to him within 3 months of receipt of the statement (4) Prescribed organisations may request copies of relevant documentation identified for the purpose   of research, development or undertaking an independent algorithmic impact assessment  (5) Nothing in this section detracts from any other rights and duties for record, inspection or disclosure  
24 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Annex 1    Algorithmic Impact Assessments (1) Prior to use or procurement of relevant algorithmic system an organisation is responsible for   completing an Algorithmic Impact Assessment in a form prescribed by regulations made under   this Act (2)  The Algorithmic Impact Assessment must be reviewed and updated at regular intervals of every   2 years and/or when the functionality, or the scope, of the automated decision system changes  (3)  The Algorithmic Impact Assessment must:   (i) identify the person and groups of persons sharing a relevant interest  (ii) analyse the risks and impacts of the system on the person or groups of persons identified    under (i) including impacts on   (a) equality of opportunity, disparity of outcome and human rights    (b) safety, privacy and security whether or not personal data is processed   (c) good work   (d) any other adverse impacts identified in the course of the assessment process and/or      subsequent monitoring  (iii) include a technical audit     (iv) provide a statement of the period for wider consultation and process for stakeholder    participation   (v) identify potential adjustments or other steps that could be taken in response to     the evaluation  (4) Any person with a relevant interest, right or freedom may request a summary Algorithmic Impact  Assessment at any time after deployment of the system (5) The Algorithmic Impact Assessment should comply with any relevant standards, certification,   verification requirements, and guidance published by the CDEI, DCRF or regulators  (6) Nothing in this part detracts from existing regulator or governance obligations for impact   assessment although the algorithmic impact assessment may operate to discharge these   obligations (7) In this section ‘good work’ means work with provides or promotes:  (a) fair access  (b) fair pay   (c) fair terms and conditions  (d) equality  (e) dignity  (f) autonomy  (g) physical and mental wellbeing  (h) access to institutions and people who can represent workers’ interests   (i) participation to determine and improve working conditions  (j) access to facilities for career guidance and training
25 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Annex 1     Duty to co-operate (1) An organisation required to record documentation must in contracting with any party to   develop, procure of apply any part of the algorithmic system (‘a contracted party’) secure   agreement by the contracted party to provide on request by the organisation   (a) the documentation required in order to produce an Algorithmic Impact Assessment     [see above]  (b) the documentation required in order to take reasonable steps  [see above] (2) A party’s duty to record documents is limited to documents which are or have been in his control    For this purpose a party has or has had a document in his control if –   (a) it is or was in the organisation’s possession  (b) the organisation has or has had a right to possession of it or  (c) the organisation has or has had a right to request, inspect or take copies of it (3) Organisations may redact material that is commercially sensitive  and  irrelevant to the decision   under consideration except under s 4 of this section  (4) The Digital Cooperation Regulation Forum or individual regulators may request all documentation   and other information from any organisation or party contracted to undertake any part of   development, procurement or application of a relevant algorithmic systemReasonable steps (1) An organisation with responsibility for a relevant algorithmic system must   (a) only consider relevant information recorded [under disclosure provisions]  (b) consider technical and non-technical mitigation or other actions  [under algorithmic    assessment procedure]  (c)  take reasonable and proportionate steps to mitigate risks, address harms and promote    benefits in the circumstances of the case including the size, resources, capabilities,    severity of harm and proximity of the organisation to any adverse impact identified   (2) In determining reasonable steps under s 1, an organisation with responsibility for an algorithmic  system person must have particular regard to   (a) impacts on vulnerable persons or groups that may be disproportionately affected   (b) the desirability of reducing inequalities of outcome which result from socio-economic    and/or place-based disadvantage   (c) the desirability of promoting the international reputation of the United Kingdom     and businesses in the UK for responsible innovation and adherence to the United Nations    Sustainable Development Goals and the UNESCO Agreement on Artificial Intelligence
Designing for accountability (1) A relevant algorithmic system must be designed to take into account   (a) interpretability of decisions made or supported   (b) equality of opportunity, disparity of outcome and human rights  (c) safety, privacy and security of personal information  (d) good work (2) In this section ‘good work’ means work with provides or promotes:  (a) fair access  (b) fair pay   (c) fair terms and conditions  (d) equality  (e) dignity  (f) autonomy  (g) physical and mental wellbeing  (h) access to institutions and people who can represent workers’ interests   (i) participation to determine and improve working conditions  (j) access to facilities for career guidance and training26 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Annex 1     Relevant algorithmic systems  (1) This Part applies to any algorithmic system developed, procured or applied by an organisation six   months after the date on which this Act is passed where there is a reasonable prospect of engaging   (a) a person’s interests, rights and/or freedoms   (b) a group of persons sharing an interest under (a)  (2) Relevant algorithmic systems include any system, tool or model that is developed, procured or    applied to make or inform a decision relating to   (a) access, terms or conditions of work  (b) tasks undertaken at work  (c) opportunities for learning, promotion or other benefits   is a relevant algorithmic system under this section (3) Any algorithmic system involving supervised, unsupervised or reinforcement machine learning    procured or deployed at work   is a relevant system under this section (4) Nothing in this Part detracts from other duties, rights, freedoms or interests of a person in any   other primary or secondary legislation relating personal data, employment or social protection
27 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Annex 2  The Good Work Charter 1 Access       Everyone should have access to good work 2 Fair pay     Everyone should be fairly paid 3 Fair conditions     Everyone should work on fair conditions set out on fair terms 4 Equality     Everyone should be treated equally and without discrimination 5 Dignity      Work should promote dignity 6 Autonomy     Work should promote autonomy 7 Wellbeing     Work should promote physical and mental wellbeing 8 Support     Everyone should have access to institutions and people who  can represent their interests 9 Participation     Everyone should be able to take part in determining and   improving working conditions 10 Learning     Everyone should have access to lifelong learning and   career guidance 
28 Endnotes
29 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Endnotes   1  Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. AI Strategy , 2021. 2  Domagala, Natalia, and Hannah Spiro. ‘Engaging with the Public about Algorithmic Transparency in the Public Sector’ .   Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, 2021. 3  Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. ‘Data: A New Direction’  consultation, 2021.   4  Gilbert, Abigail and Anna Thomas ‘The Amazonian Era: The Gigification of Work’ Institute for the Future of Work, 2021 .   5 Graham, Logan, Abigail Gilbert, Joshua Simons, and Anna Thomas. ‘Artificial Intelligence in Hiring’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020.  6  Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Draft Online Safety Bill, 2021.  7  Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. Draft Online Safety Bill, 2021. 8  The Alan Turing Institute ‘Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law Assurance Framework for AI Systems: A Proposal   Prepared for the Council of Europe’s Ad hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence’ Forthcoming;   Leslie, David. Understanding artificial intelligence ethics and safety: A guide for the responsible design and implementation of   AI systems in the public sector , The Alan Turing Institute, 2019; The Information Commissioner’s Office and the Alan Turing   Institute, Explaining decisions made with AI . 2020.  9  Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. ‘Review into Bias in Algorithmic Decision-Making’ , 2020. 10  All-Party Parliamentary Group on the Future of Work. ‘Report into The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work’ , 2021.  11  Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021. 12 Graham, Logan, Abigail Gilbert, Joshua Simons, and Anna Thomas. ‘Artificial Intelligence in Hiring’ .  Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 13  Department for Digital, Culture Media and Sport. ‘Data: A New Direction’ consultation, 2021.  Businesses are increasingly concerned about algorithms causing major fiscal or reputational damage. Koshiyama, Adriano,   Emre Kazim, Philip Treleaven, Pete Rai, Lukasz Szpruch, Giles Pavey, Ghazi Ahamat et al. “Towards Algorithm Auditing: A Survey   on Managing Legal, Ethical and Technological Risks of AI, ML and Associated Algorithms. ” (2021). The need for effective   ‘assurance’ has been flagged by the CDEI, https://cdei.blog.gov.uk/2021/04/15/the-need-for-effective-ai-assurance/  with impact   assessment a recognised part of this.  14  Gilbert, Abigail and Anna Thomas ‘The Amazonian Era: The Gigification of Work’ Institute for the Future of Work, 2021.  Recruitment presents a particularly challenging use case for auditing impacts, see: Kazim, Emre, Adriano Soares Koshiyama,   Airlie Hilliard, and Roseline Polle. “Systematizing Audit in Algorithmic Recruitment. ” Journal of Intelligence  9, no. 3 (2021): 46. 15  Ada Lovelace Institute, AI Now Institute, and Open Government Partnership. ‘Algorithmic Accountability for the Public Sector’ , 2021.   https://www.opengovpartnership.org/documents/ algorithmic-accountability-public-sector/ . 16  Ad Hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence (CAHAI). ‘Feasibility Study’ . Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2020. 17  Selbst, Andrew D. ‘An Institutional View Of Algorithmic Impact Assessments’ , 2021.  18 Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. ‘Data: A New Direction’ , 2021. 19 Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 .   However, the DPIA model as a form of impact assessment also only considers a limited range of harms, see more in:   Kazim, E., Koshiyama, A. The interrelation between data and AI ethics in the context of impact assessments.   AI Ethics 1, 219–225 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-020-00029-w . 20 Information Commissioners Office ’Consultation on the ICO’s AI and data protection risk toolkit’ 2021.  https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/ico-and-stakeholder-consultations/consultation-on-the-ico-s-ai-and-data-protection-risk-toolkit/ . 21 Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 22  Prospect and Institute for the Future of Work. ‘Data Protection Impact Assessments: A Union Guide’ 2020. 23 Reisman, Dillon, Jason Schultz, Kate Crawford, and Meredith Whittaker.   ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments: A Practical Framework for Public Agency Accountability’ . AI Now Institute, 2018, 1–22. 24 Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 25  Information Commissioners Office. ‘Call for Views on Employment Practices’ , 2021.
Endnotes   26  Mökander, Jakob, Maria Axente, Federico Casolari, and Luciano Floridi.   ‘Conformity Assessments and Post-Market Monitoring: A Guide to the Role of Auditing in the Proposed European AI Regulation’ ,   2021, 27; Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf. ‘Assembling   Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021.  27 Reisman, Dillon, Jason Schultz, Kate Crawford, and Meredith Whittaker.   ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments: A Practical Framework for Public Agency Accountability’ . AI Now Institute, 2018, 1–22;   European Parliamentary Research Service. A Governance Framework for Algorithmic Accountability and Transparency.   LU: Publications Office, 2019. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/59990 ;   Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 ;   Selbst, Andrew D. ‘An Institutional View Of Algorithmic Impact Assessments’ , 2021. 28  Simons, Josh, and Anna Thomas. ‘Machine Learning Case Studies’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 29 Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021.  Field experience from UCL and Holistic AI suggest that Human Resource Impact Assessments are often, in practice,   reduced to questions of compliance with Equality Legislation, which itself requires greater clarification to manage trade-offs. 30  Simons, Josh, and Anna Thomas. ‘Machine Learning Case Studies’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020.   31  United States Congress. Algorithmic Accountability Act of 2019 , 2019.  32 Information Commissioner’s Office. ‘Examples of Processing “Likely to Result in High Risk”’ , n.d.  33  Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, Policy on Service and Digital.  34  Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, Policy on Service and Digital. 35  European Parliament. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016   on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data,   and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (2016).  36  Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 37  Information Commissioner’s Office. ‘Examples of Processing “Likely to Result in High Risk”’ , n.d. 38 Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021. 39  Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work. Also, evidence provided by Dr David Leslie of the Turing Institute to the All Party Parliamentary   Group on the Future of Work Inquiry into the use of AI at the Workplace. 40  Leslie, David. ‘Human Rights, Democracy, and the Rule of Law Assurance Framework for AI Systems: A Proposal Prepared for   the Council of Europe’s Ad Hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence’ , n.d; All-Party Parliamentary Group on the Future of Work.   ‘Report into The New Frontier: Artificial Intelligence at Work’ , 2021.  41  Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 42  Rieke, Aaron, Miranda Bogen, and David Robinson. ‘Public Scrutiny of Automated Decisions: Early Lessons and Emerging Methods’ .   Omidyar Network; Upturn, 2018. 43  With thanks to Dr Logan Graham. 44  Cobbe, Jennifer, Michelle Seng Ah Lee, and Jatinder Singh.   ‘Reviewable Automated Decision-Making: A Framework for Accountable Algorithmic Systems’ . In Proceedings of the   2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 598–609. Virtual Event Canada: ACM, 2021.   https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445921 . 45  We note other domains of impact assessments could have more established norms in this regard.  46 Leslie, David. ‘Understanding Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Safety: A Guide for the Responsible Design and Implementation   of AI Systems in the Public Sector’ . Available at SSRN 3403301, 2019. 47 Katyal, Sonia K. ‘Private Accountability in an Age of Artificial Intelligence’ . UCLA Law Review 66 (2019): 54–141. 48 Katyal, Sonia K. ‘Private Accountability in an Age of Artificial Intelligence’ . UCLA Law Review 66 (2019): 54–141.30 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work
31 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Endnotes   49 Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019.  https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 .  50  HUDERIAs are the choice of governance mechanism for the majority of stakeholders in a recent surevy: 81% of respondents   selected “Human rights, rule of law and democracy impact assessments” , followed by “audits and intersectional audits” (70%)   and mechanisms of “certification and quality labelling” (51%). Council of Europe’s public survey on how to define and regulate.   https://ecnl.org/news/ai-policy-message-delivered-will-states-listen . 51 International Finance Corporation. ‘Stakeholder Engagement: A Good Practice Handbook for Companies Doing Business in   Emerging Markets’ . World Bank Group, 2007. 52 See forthcoming guidance on stakeholder engagement for workplace audits of algorithmic systems by Institute for the Future   of Work, 2022. 53  All Party Parliamentary Group on the Future of Work Inquiry into AI at the Workplace, Evidence from Dr David Leslie.  54  Simons, Josh, and Anna Thomas. ‘Machine Learning Case Studies’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020;   Gilbert, Abigail and Anna Thomas ‘The Amazonian Era: The Gigification of Work’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2021.   55  Simons, Josh, and Anna Thomas. ‘Machine Learning Case Studies’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020;  Gilbert, Abigail and Anna Thomas ‘The Amazonian Era: The Gigification of Work’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2021. 56  Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021.   57  Gebru, Timnit, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and   Kate Crawford. ‘Datasheets for Datasets’ . ArXiv:1803.09010 [Cs], 19 March 2020. http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09010 .  58 Domagala, Natalia, and Hannah Spiro. ‘Engaging with the Public about Algorithmic Transparency in the Public Sector’ .   Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, 2021.   59  Kazim, Emre, Adriano Soares Koshiyama, Airlie Hilliard, and Roseline Polle. ‘Systematizing Audit in Algorithmic Recruitment’ .    Journal of Intelligence 9, no. 3 (17 September 2021): 46. https://doi.org/10.3390/jintelligence9030046 . 60  Mökander, Jakob, Maria Axente, Federico Casolari, and Luciano Floridi. ‘Conformity Assessments and Post-Market Monitoring:   A Guide to the Role of Auditing in the Proposed European AI Regulation’ , 2021, 27. 61  Raji, Inioluwa Deborah, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud,   Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes.   ‘Closing the AI Accountability Gap: Defining an End-to-End Framework for Internal Algorithmic Auditing’ , 2020, 12.  62  Mökander, Jakob, Maria Axente, Federico Casolari, and Luciano Floridi. ‘Conformity Assessments and Post-Market Monitoring:   A Guide to the Role of Auditing in the Proposed European AI Regulation’ , 2021, 27. 63  Sloane, Mona, Emanuel Moss, and Rumman Chowdhury. ‘A Silicon Valley Love Triangle: Hiring Algorithms, Pseudo- Science,   and the Quest for Auditability’ , 2021, 10. 64 Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf. ‘Assembling Accountability:   Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021. 65  Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020.  66  Ada Lovelace Institute and Reset. ‘Inspecting Algorithms in Social Media Platforms’ , 2020.  67  Ada Lovelace Institute and Reset. ‘Inspecting Algorithms in Social Media Platforms’ , 2020.  Third party auditors need to be competent. In fact, an ecosystem may be needed. See more in: Thelisson, Eva, Kirtan Padh,   and L. Elisa Celis. “Regulatory mechanisms and algorithms towards trust in AI/ML. ” In Proceedings of the IJCAI 2017 workshop    on explainable artificial intelligence (XAI), Melbourne, Australia . 2017; Barclay, Iain, Harrison Taylor, Alun Preece, Ian Taylor,   Dinesh Verma, and Geeth de Mel. “A framework for fostering transparency in shared artificial intelligence models by increasing   visibility of contributions. ” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience  33, no. 19 (2021): e6129. 68  Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf. ‘Assembling Accountability:   Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021. 69  Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 70 See proposed amendment in the Annex, informed by Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston,   David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and Anna Thomas.   ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 
32 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Endnotes   71 Ada Lovelace Institute, AI Now Institute and Open Government Partnership. (2021). Algorithmic Accountability for the   Public Sector. Available at: https://www.opengovpartnership.org/documents/algorithmic-accountability-public-sector/ . 72 Graham, Logan, Abigail Gilbert, Joshua Simons, and Anna Thomas. ‘Artificial Intelligence in Hiring’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020; Kazim, Emre, Adriano Soares Koshiyama, Airlie Hilliard, and Roseline Polle.   ‘Systematizing Audit in Algorithmic Recruitment’ . Journal of Intelligence 9, no. 3 (17 September 2021): 46.   https://doi.org/10.3390/jintelligence9030046 .  73 Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021. 74 Binns, Reuben, Abigail Gilbert, Anne-Marie Imafidon, Tim Johnston, David Leslie, Joshua Simons, Helen Mountfield, and   Anna Thomas. ‘Mind the Gap: How to Fill the Equality and AI Accountability Gap in an Automated World’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 75  Ada Lovelace Institute. ‘Beyond Face Value: Public Attitudes to Facial Recognition Technology’ , 2019; Sloane, Mona,   Emanuel Moss, and Rumman Chowdhury. ‘A Silicon Valley Love Triangle: Hiring Algorithms, Pseudo- Science, and the Quest   for Auditability’ , 2021, 10.  76 Katyal, Sonia K. ‘Private Accountability in an Age of Artificial Intelligence’ . UCLA Law Review 66 (2019): 54–141; Kaminski,   Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered Explanations’ .   SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 . 77  Leslie, David and Briggs, Morgan. ‘Explaining Decisions Made with AI: A Workbook (Use Case 1: AI-Assisted Recruitment Tool)’ .   Zenodo, 20 March 2021. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.4624711 . 78  Moss, Emanuel, Elizabeth Anne Watkins, Ranjit Singh, Madeleine Clare Elish, and Jacob Metcalf.   ‘Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public Interest’ . Available at SSRN 3877437, 2021.   79  Kazim, Emre, Adriano Soares Koshiyama, Airlie Hilliard, and Roseline Polle. ‘Systematizing Audit in Algorithmic Recruitment’ .   Journal of Intelligence 9, no. 3 (17 September 2021): 46. https://doi.org/10.3390/jintelligence9030046 .  80 European Parliamentary Research Service. A Governance Framework for Algorithmic Accountability and Transparency.   LU: Publications Office, 2019. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/59990 . Allocative harms refer to the unequal distribution of   resources across groups, while representational harms refers to the unequal distribution of groups in positions of power,   influence and political or cultural representation.   81 Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 ;   Reisman, Dillon, Jason Schultz, Kate Crawford, and Meredith Whittaker. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments: A Practical   Framework for Public Agency Accountability’ . AI Now Institute, 2018, 1–22. 82  Data & Society. ‘Recommendations for Assessing AI Impacts to Human Rights, Democracy, and the Rule of Law’ , 2021. 83  Alan Turing Institute ‘Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law Assurance Framework for AI Systems: A Proposal Prepared   for the Council of Europe’s Ad hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence’ Forthcoming.  84  Hutchinson, Ben, Andrew Smart, Alex Hanna, Emily Denton, Christina Greer, Oddur Kjartansson, Parker Barnes, and   Margaret Mitchell. “Towards accountability for machine learning datasets: Practices from software engineering and   infrastructure. ” In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pp. 560–575. 2021. 85  Institute for the Future of Work, ‘Good Work Charter’ (2019).   Available at: https://www.ifow.org/publications/the-ifow-good-work-charter . 86 In addition to right-based measures, some auditing impact measurements involve metrics relevant to workers but that are not   rights-based, such as the IEEE 7010 standard which is a measure of wellbeing. 87  Schiff, Daniel, Aladdin Ayesh, Laura Musikanski, and John C. Havens.   “IEEE 7010: A new standard for assessing the well-being implications of artificial intelligence. ”   In 2020 IEEE international conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (SMC) , pp. 2746–2753. IEEE, 2020.  88  Alan Turing Institute ‘Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law Assurance Framework for AI Systems: A Proposal Prepared   for the Council of Europe’s Ad hoc Committee on Artificial Intelligence’ Forthcoming .  89  Eidelson, Benjamin. “Patterned Inequality, Compounding Injustice, and Algorithmic Prediction. ” The American Journal of Law  and Equality (Forthcoming)  (2021); Hellman, Deborah. “Personal Responsibility in an Unjust World: A Reply to Eidelson. ”   The American Journal of Law and Equality (forthcoming), Virginia Public Law and Legal Theory Research Paper  2021–28 (2021).  Such assessments should also question whether it is ultimately just and fair to automate certain processes, rather than whether   or not automation is fair. This draws an important distinction between an engineering problem and a societal problem.   Kazim, Emre, Jeremy Barnett, and Adriano Koshiyama. “Automation and Fairness: Assessing the Automation of Fairness in   Cases of Reasonable Pluralism and Considering the Blackbox of Human Judgment. ” Available at SSRN 3698404 (2020).
33 Algorithmic Impact Assessments Institute for the Future of Work Endnotes   90  In line with the mission of the Equality and Human Rights Commission. 91 Allen, Robin and Dee Masters. ‘Technology Managing People – the legal implications: A report for the Trades Union Congress by   the AI Law Consultancy’ AI Law Hub, TUC 2021.  92 Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. ‘Review into Bias in Algorithmic Decision Making’ 2020.  We further note issues in revealing intersectional bias and discrimination in evaluating either equality of opportunity or   equality of outcome (when several demographic identifiers/protected charateristics are at play), when blunt statistical tests   and classifications are deployed. This can lead organisations to have a mistaken sense of parity. Roseline Polle and Emre   Kazim working via HolisticAI and UCL have had success in revealing intersectional discrimination in ML audits via application   of Chi-Squared tests. This could provide technical grounds for a more nuanced reading of the Equality Act and permit more   granular forms of mitigation. 93 Graham, Logan, Abigail Gilbert, Joshua Simons, and Anna Thomas. ‘Artificial Intelligence in Hiring’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020.  94 Ada Lovelace Institute and Data Kind UK. ‘Examining the Black Box’ , 2020.   https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/report/examining-the-black-box-tools-for-assessing-algorithmic-systems/ 95  Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 . 96  See also EqIA model in Graham, Logan, Abigail Gilbert, Joshua Simons, and Anna Thomas. ‘Artificial Intelligence in Hiring’ .   Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 97  Suresh, Harini, and John Guttag. “A framework for understanding sources of harm throughout the machine learning life cycle. ”   In Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization , pp. 1–9. 2021.  98 Reed, Chris, Elizabeth Kennedy, and Sara Silva.   “Responsibility, autonomy and accountability: legal liability for machine learning. ”   Queen Mary School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper  243 (2016). 99  Cobbe, Jennifer.   “Administrative law and the machines of government: judicial review of automated public-sector decision-making. ”   Legal Studies 39, no. 4 (2019): 636–655. 100  Judgement by the Hauge District Court, Milieudefensie et al. v. Royal Dutch Shell plc.   https://uitspraken.rechtspraak.nl/inziendocument?id=ECLI:NL:RBDHA:2021:5339 .   101  Equality Act 2010, c15 Part 2 Chapter 1 Section 6.   https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents .  102 Gilbert, Abigail and Anna Thomas ‘The Amazonian Era: The Gigification of Work’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2021.   103 Dobbe, Roel, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, and Yonatan Mintz.   “Hard Choices in Artificial Intelligence. ” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11022 (2021);   Lee, Min Kyung, Daniel Kusbit, Anson Kahng, Ji Tae Kim, Xinran Yuan, Allissa Chan, Daniel See et al.   “WeBuildAI: Participatory framework for algorithmic governance. ”   Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 3, no. CSCW (2019): 1–35. 104  Kaminski, Margot E., and Gianclaudio Malgieri. ‘Algorithmic Impact Assessments under the GDPR: Producing Multi-Layered   Explanations’ . SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3456224 ;   European Parliamentary Research Service. A Governance Framework for Algorithmic Accountability and Transparency.   LU: Publications Office, 2019. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/59990 .  105 Simons, Josh, and Anna Thomas. ‘Machine Learning Case Studies’ . Institute for the Future of Work, 2020. 106  Draft introduction for review: New clauses to require the establishment of a duty to undertake assessment of algorithmic   impact assessments where organisations develop, procure or commence application of an algorithmic decision-making   system; to disclose relevant information concerning the intended use of algorithmic decision-making system before procuring   or commencing application of their use to persons likely to be affected by its use; to undertake consultation of persons likely   to be affected before procuring or commencing application of an algorithmic decision-making system; to take reasonable   steps to mitigate risks identified by such assessment before procuring or commencing application of an algorithmic   decision-making system; to undertake regular biennial audits of the impact and effect of algorithmic decision making systems;   to establish additional powers of investigation and remedies for the Digital Regulatory Forum; and for connected purposes. 
Registered charity number 1180718Somerset House  The Exchange London  WC2R 1LA www.ifow.org @FutureWorkInst
