









Sony Group Portal - AI Initiatives - Sony Group's Initiatives for Responsible AI



























































menu







close










                    Businesses & Products
                    open




Businesses & Products Top



Games & Network Services




PlayStation




Sony Interactive Entertainment






Music




Pictures: Movies & TV Shows




Electronics: Entertainment Technology & Services




Consumer Electronics




Professional Products & Solutions






Imaging & Sensing Solutions




Financial Services




New Initiatives





Close







                    About Sony Group
                    open




About Sony Group Top



Sony's Purpose & Values




Message from the CEO and COO




News Releases




Sony Corporate Blog




Brand




History




Corporate Data




Affiliated Companies





Close






                    Technology
                    open




Technology Top



Message from CTO




Sony's R&D




Stories




People behind Sony's technology




Programs & Events




Responsible AI




Human-Centered Design





Close






                    Sustainability
                    open




Sustainability Top



Vision of Founder and Approach to Sustainability




Sustainability Report




Environment




Social Contribution




Diversity, Equity & Inclusion




Accessibility




Response to COVID-19





Close






                    Design
                    open




Design Top



About




Design Stories




Interviews & Lectures




Gallery




News





Close






                    Employees / Careers
                    open




Employees Top
Careers Top


Close






                    Investor Relations
                    open




Investor Relations Top



IR News




IR Library




Corporate Report




Earning Announcement




Corporate Bonds & Ratings





Close







Contact Us








Search button in the site






Search













Home
Technology
Responsible AI




Responsible AI

Japanese















contents menu









Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines
AI Ethics: Promotion & Projects
Related Sony Group Initiatives









Sony Group's Initiatives for Responsible AI
Sony, with the aim of utilizing AI technology to enrich people's
                life styles and contribute to the development of society, will pursue accountability and
                transparency while actively engaging in dialogue with stakeholders. We will continue to promote
                responsible AI in order to maintain the trust of products and services by stakeholders.







Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines


Sony established the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines in September 2018.Through the
                  utilization of artificial intelligence (AI), Sony aims to contribute to the development of a
                  peaceful and sustainable society while delivering kando - a sense of
                  excitement, wonder or emotion - to the world. Starting from the electronics business, Sony has
                  continued to expand its business area and has become a diverse global company that offers
                  entertainment such as music and movies, as well as financial services. To operate these business
                  areas based on Sony's Purpose to "Fill the world with emotion, through the power of creativity and
                  technology.", Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines are hereby set forth below to ensure and promote a
                  dialogue with various stakeholders and the proper utilization and research and development
                  ("R&D") of AI within Sony Group.


1. Supporting Creative Life Styles and Building a Better Society
Through advancing its AI-related R&D and promoting the utilization of AI in a manner
                  harmonized with society, Sony aims to support the exploration of the potential for each individual
                  to empower their lives, and to contribute to enrichment of our culture and push our civilization
                  forward by providing novel and creative types of kando. Sony will
                  engage in sustainable social development and endeavor to utilize the power of AI for contributing
                  to global problem-solving and for the development of a peaceful and sustainable society.


2. Stakeholder Engagement
In order to solve the challenges arising from use of AI while striving for better AI utilization,
                  Sony will seriously consider the interests and concerns of various stakeholders including its
                  customers and creators, and proactively advance a dialogue with related industries, organizations,
                  academic communities and more. For this purpose, Sony will construct the appropriate channels for
                  ensuring that the content and results of these discussions are provided to officers and employees,
                  including researchers and developers, who are involved in the corresponding businesses, as well as
                  for ensuring further engagement with its various stakeholders.


3. Provision of Trusted Products and Services
Sony understands the need for safety when dealing with products and services utilizing AI and
                  will continue to respond to security risks such as unauthorized access. AI systems may utilize
                  statistical or probabilistic methods to achieve results. In the interest of Sony's customers and
                  to maintain their trust, Sony will design whole systems with an awareness of the responsibility
                  associated with the characteristics of such methods.


4. Privacy Protection
Sony, in compliance with laws and regulations as well as applicable internal rules and policies,
                  seeks to enhance the security and protection of customers' personal data acquired via products and
                  services utilizing AI, and build an environment where said personal data is processed in ways that
                  respect the intention and trust of customers.


5. Respect for Fairness
In its utilization of AI, Sony will respect diversity and human rights of its customers and other
                  stakeholders without any discrimination while striving to contribute to the resolution of social
                  problems through its activities in its own and related industries.


6. Pursuit of Transparency
During the planning and design stages for its products and services that utilize AI, Sony will
                  strive to introduce methods of capturing the reasoning behind the decisions made by AI utilized in
                  said products and services. Additionally, it will endeavor to provide intelligible explanations
                  and information to customers about the possible impact of using these products and services.


7. The Evolution of AI and Ongoing Education
People's lives have continuously changed with the advance in technology across history. Sony will
                  be cognizant of the effects and impact of products and services that utilize AI on society and
                  will proactively work to contribute to developing AI to create a better society and foster human
                  talent capable of shaping our collective bright future through R&D and/or utilization of AI.
                



Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines（PDF）


Responsible AI Utilization and R&D







AI Ethics: Promotion & Projects


Framework for AI Ethics Initiatives
The Sony Group AI Ethics Committee, established in 2019, examines AI use cases to ensure
                  compliance with the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines.
                  In 2021, the AI Ethics Office was established to provide subject matter expertise on AI ethics to
                  all Sony business units. In addition, Sony has established a notification system for AI
                  utilization in products, services, and internal operations in Sony Group's business units, to
                  share information on AI ethics risks. 
                  In March 2021, in accordance with the Sony Group AI Ethics Guidelines, Sony established an
                  internal document stipulating requirements to be complied with in the commercialization process of
                  electronic products and services, and in July 2021 started conducting AI ethics assessments in the
                  product development life cycle. Sony uses e-learning tools to promote an understanding of AI
                  ethics among its employees and invites speakers from outside the company to discuss this issue at
                  lectures and symposia.



Stakeholder Dialogue and External Collaboration
Sony actively pursues dialogue with relevant companies, organizations, and the academic community
                  on ethical issues surrounding AI utilization, while considering the interests of diverse
                  stakeholders, including customers and creators.
                  In May 2017, Sony became the first Japanese company to join the Partnership on AI to Benefit
                  People and Society (PAI), a non-profit organization created to contribute to solutions for some of
                  humanity's challenging problems, including advancing the understanding of AI and addressing ethics
                  surrounding AI technology. One of the most common issues in AI ethics is that of fairness,
                  transparency, and accountability, abbreviated as "FTA." Sony utilizes knowledge it has gained from
                  its AI and robotics related research, development, and business ventures and contributes to a
                  number of working groups addressing this issue. Sony chaired the Social and Societal Influences of
                  AI Working Group, which focuses on the social impacts of AI, and currently serves as an expert
                  advisor for PAI's strategic planning. Sony also serves on the steering committee for ABOUT
                  ML,* an initiative to improve the transparency of machine learning. Sony also serves as
                  an expert advisor to the Explainability Research Project and Diversity and Inclusion Research
                  Project.
* ABOUT ML stands for "Annotation and Benchmarking on Understanding and
                  Transparency of Machine Learning Lifecycles."

Partnership on AI



Sony's Global Head of AI Ethics is also one of the General Chairs of the 2022 ACM Conference on
                  Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), the premier conference on sociotechnical
                  algorithmic systems.

ACM FAccT



Sony is also involved with Japanese initiatives to establish principles and guidelines that
                  promote the utilization of AI for social good. These initiatives include the AI Utilization
                  Strategy published by Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) in February 2019 and the Social
                  Principles of Human-centric AI published by Japan's Cabinet Office in March 2019. Sony is
                  currently a member of the Conference toward AI Network Society, a group within the Ministry of
                  Internal Affairs and Communications whose goal is the comprehensive study of the social, economic,
                  ethical, and legal factors involved in the promotion of AI networks throughout society as a whole.
                

AI
                    Utilization Strategy (Keidanren website)


Social Principles of Human-centric AI(Cabinet Secretariat website)


The Conference toward AI Network(Ministry
                      of Internal Affairs and Communications website)



Additionally, Sony is a participant in the Global Partnership on AI, an initiative launched in
                  June 2020 to promote the development and utilization of AI based on human-centric principles, and
                  serves as a member of the AI and Pandemic Response Subgroup, a working group that aids the
                  development of responsible AI solutions for epidemics of infectious disease such as COVID-19.

Global Partnership on AI



Trusted R&D for AI
Sony pursues R&D for AI that is trusted and backed by solid technologies, and is engaged in
                  technical initiatives related to AI ethics. As a solution for securing FTA, Sony equipped its AI
                  development tool Neural Network Console with eXplainable AI (XAI) to make it easy to use. XAI is a
                  technology that enables people to understand the logic behind AI decision-making, an area often
                  called the "black box" since it is not always immediately apparent. Sony has also released its
                  machine learning fairness library and Responsible AI XAI source code as open source software.

Neural Network Console



Additionally, Sony provided its Prediction One predictive analysis tool with the ability to
                  visualize the predictive reasoning.

Prediction One



In 2021, Sony also launched the AI ethics flagship within Sony AI with projects to conduct
                  cutting-edge research on the challenges faced in the development of AI products and services,
                  including ethical data collection and algorithmic fairness. Taking advantage of its position as a
                  company that extends across a wide range of industries, Sony will put fair and transparent AI into
                  practice, leveraging its global and diverse perspective.


Publications

・Being 'Seen' vs. 'Mis-Seen': Tensions between Privacy and Fairness
                      in Computer Vision2022Alice XiangHarvard Journal of Law & Technology,
                    Forthcoming
・Promises and Challenges of Causality for Ethical
                      Machine Learning2022Aida Rahmattalabi, Alice XiangarXiv preprint
・Reconciling Legal and Technical Approaches to
                      Algorithmic Bias2021Alice Xiang88 Tennessee Law Review 649
・Data Cleansing for Deep Neural Networks with
                      Storage-efficient Approximation of Influence Functions2021Kenji Suzuki,
                    Yoshiyuki Kobayashi, Takuya NarihiraThe 24th Meeting on Image Recognition and Understanding
                    (MIRU2021), arXiv preprint
・Adversarial Attacks for Tabular Data: Application to
                      Fraud Detection and Imbalanced Data2021Francesco Cartella, Orlando Anunciação,
                    Yuki Funabiki, Daisuke Yamaguchi, Toru Akishita, Olivier ElshochtSafeAI@AAAI 2021, arXiv
                    preprint










Related Sony Group Initiatives


Integrity and Sincerity are the key Values to achieving Sony's Purpose. The Sony Group Code of
                  Conduct sets forth a standard of daily behavior based on these Values. The Code of Conduct
                  supports Sony's value creation and serves as the basis for earning the trust for the Sony brand
                  through the ethical and responsible conduct of every Sony Group employee.

Sony Group Code of Conduct



Sony's policy on respect for human rights is stipulated in the Sony Group Code of Conduct. All
                  Group companies are required to respect human rights and conduct sincere business operations in
                  accordance with this policy and any related laws and regulations. In regards to ethical issues
                  related to the use of AI, we are responding sincerely from the perspective of fairness and
                  transparency while engaging in dialogue with stakeholders.

Sony's Approach to Respect for Human Rights



Sony, with regard to its philosophy and basic policy on product quality and customer service,
                  aims to improve quality and customer service from the customer's point of view in a way that can
                  provide customers with a sense of "satisfaction", "trust", and "safety".

Commitment to Quality and Customer Service



In order to protect the privacy and personal information of customers, employees and other
                  stakeholders, Sony carries out continuous activities under a system of governance over the entire
                  Group in such a way that allows us to effectively manage potential risks and incorporate measures
                  to protect privacy into our systems and products, and we are working hard on the utilization of AI
                  as part of these activities.

Protection of Privacy and Personal Information







R&D Activities：AI & Machine Learning









Home
Technology
Responsible AI















Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy

Customize Cookies

About this Site
Site Map


Copyright 2024 Sony Group Corporation














