The EURON Roboethics Roadmap Gianmarco Veruggio  Scuola di Robotica Genova, Italy gianmarco@veruggio.it  Abstract  - This paper deals with the results of the Euron  Roboethics Atelier 2006 (Genoa, Italy, Feb.-March. 2006),  comprising in the Roboethics Roadmap; and it offers a short overview of the ethical problems involved in the development of  the next generation of the humanoid robots.  Index Terms - Roboethics, Robotics, Ethics.  I.  INTRODUCTION  The importance and urgency of Roboethics has been  demonstrated by our recent history. Three of the front rank  fields of science and technology: Nuclear Physics,  Bioengineering, and Computer Science, have already been forced to face the consequences of their ethics and their  research’s applications because of pressure caused by dramatic  and troubling events, or because of the concern of the general  public. In many countries, public opinion, shocked by some of  these effects, urged to either halt the whole research/applications, or to strictly control them. Robotics is rapidly becoming one of the leading fields of  science and technology: we can forecast that in the XXI century humanity will coexist with the first alien intelligence  we have ever come into contact with - robots. It will be an  event rich in ethical, social and economic problems. The  public is already asking questions such as: “Could a robot do  "good" and "evil”? “Could robots be dangerous for humankind?”.  Like Nuclear Physics, Chemistry or Bioengineering, in a  few years, Robotics could also be placed under scrutiny from  an ethical standpoint by the public and Public Institutions  (Governments, Ethics Committees, Supranational Institutions). Feeling the responsibilities involved in their practices, an  increasing number of roboticists from all over the world, in  cross-cultural collaboration with scholars of Humanities, have started deep discussions aimed to lay down the Roboethics, the  ethics that should inspire the design, manufacturing and use of  robots.   II.  R OBOTICS AND ETHICS  Is Robotics a new science, or is it a branch or a field of  application of Engineering? Actually Robotics is a discipline  born from Mechanics, Physics/Mathematics, Automation and  Control, Electronics, Computer Science, Cybernetics and  Artificial Intelligence.  This shows that Robotics is a unique combination of many scientific disciplines, whose fields of  applications are broadening more and more, according to the  scientific and technological achievements. A. Specificity of Robotics   It is the first time in history that humanity is approaching  the challenge to replicate an intelligent and autonomous entity. This compels the scientific community to examine closely the  very concept of intelligence – in humans, animals, and of the  mechanical – from a cybernetic standpoint.   In fact, complex concepts like autonomy, learning,  consciousness, evaluation, free will, decision making,  freedom, emotions, and many others shall be analysed, taking  into account that the same concept shall not have, in humans,  animals, and machines, the same semantic meaning.  From this standpoint, it can be seen as natural and  necessary that Robotics drew on several other disciplines, like  Logic, Linguistics, Neuroscience, Psychology, Biology,  Physiology, Philosophy, Literature, Natural History,  Anthropology, Art, Design.  Robotics de facto unifies the so called two cultures, Science and Humanities.   The effort to design Roboethics should take care of this  specificity. This means that experts shall view Robotics as a whole - in spite of the current early stage which recalls a  melting pot – so they can achieve the vision of the Robotics’  future.  B. The Three Laws of Robotics   In 1942, novelist Isaac Asimov formulated, in the novel  Runaround, the Three Laws of Robotics:  1. A robot may not injure a human being, or through  inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.  2. A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings  except where such orders would conflict with the First  Law.  3. A robot must protect its own existence as long as such  protection does not conflict with the 1st or 2nd Law   Later on he added the 4th Law (known as Law Zero): 4. No robot may harm humanity or, through inaction, allow  humanity to come to harm.   The theme of the relationship between humankind and autonomous machines – or, automata - appeared early in world  literature, developed firstly through legends and myths, more  recently by scientific and moral essays.    The topic of the rebellions of automata recurs in the  classic European literature, as well as the misuse or the evil use of the product of ingenuity. It is not so in all the world  cultures: for instance, the mythology of the Japanese cultures  does not include such paradigm. On the contrary, machines  HUMANOIDS’06 1-4244-0200-X/06/$20.00  2006 IEEE 612
(and, in general, human products) are always beneficial and  friendly to humanity.   This difference in seeing the machines is a subject we  should take into account and analyse.  Questions:  • How far can we go in embodying ethics in a robot?   • Which kind of “ethics” is a robotics one?  • How contradictory is, on one side, the need to implement  in robots an ethics, and, on the other, the development of  robot’s autonomy?  • Although far-sighting and forewarning, could Asimov’s  three Laws become really the Ethics of Robots?  • Is it right that robots can exhibit a “personality”?  • Is it right that robot can express “emotion”?  C. What is a Robot?    Robotics scientists, researchers, and the general public have about robots different evaluations, which should taken  into account in the Roboethics Roadmap.   Robots are nothing but machines. Many consider robots  as mere machines - very sophisticated and helpful ones - but  always machines. According to this view, robots do not have  any hierarchically higher characteristics, nor will they be  provided with consciousness, free will, or with the level of  autonomy superior to that embodied by the designer. In this frame, Roboethics can be compared to an Engineering Applied  Ethics.   Robots have ethical dimensions. In this view, an ethical  dimension is intrinsic within robots. This derives from a conception according to which technology is not an addition to man but is, in fact, one of the ways in which mankind  distinguishes itself from animals. So that, as language, and  computers, but even more, humanoids robots are symbolic  devices designed by humanity to improve its capacity of  reproducing itself, and to act with charity and good. (J. M. Galvan)   Robots as moral agents. Artificial agents particularly but  not only those in Cyberspace, extend the class of entities that  can be involved in moral situations. For they can be conceived  as moral patients (as entities that can be acted upon for good  or evil) and also as moral agents (not necessarily exhibiting  free will, mental states or responsibility, but as entities that can  perform actions, again for good or evil).  This complements the more traditional approach, common at least since  Montaigne and Descartes, which considers whether or not  (artificial) agents have mental states, feelings, emotions and so  on. By focusing directly on ‘mind-less morality’ we are able to  avoid that question and also many of the concerns of Artificial Intelligence. (L. Floridi)   Robots, evolution of a new specie. According to this point  of view, not only will our robotics machines have autonomy  and consciences, but humanity will create machines that  exceed us in the moral as well as the intellectual dimensions.  Robots, with their rational mind and unshaken morality, will  be the new species: Our machines will be better than us, and  we will be better for having created them. (J. Storrs Hall) III.  T HE BIRTH OF ROBOETHICS  The name Roboethics (coined in 2002 by the author) was officially proposed during the First International Symposium  of Roboethics (Sanremo, Jan/Feb. 2004), and rapidly showed  its potential, because naming things - according to the  Principle of Composition  - gives them reality.   Philosophers, jurists, sociologists, anthropologist and  moralists, together with robotic scientists, were called to  contribute to lay the foundations of the Ethics in the designing,  developing and employing robots.  A. Main positions on Roboethics   According to the anthropologist Daniela Cerqui, three  main ethical positions emerged from the robotics community:   Not interested in ethics.  This is the attitude of those who consider that their actions  are strictly technical, and do not think they have a social or a  moral responsibility in their work.   Interested in short-term ethical questions.   This is the attitude of those who express their ethical concern in terms of “good” or “bad,” and who refer to some  cultural values and social conventions. This attitude includes  respecting and helping humans in diverse areas, such as  implementing laws or in helping elderly people.   Interested in long-term ethical concerns.  This is the attitude of those who express their ethical  concern in terms of global, long-term questions: for instance,  the “Digital divide” between South and North; or young and elderly. They are aware of the gap between industrialized and  poor countries, and wonder whether the former should not  change their way of developing robotics in order to be more  useful to the latter.   B. Disciplines involved in Roboethics   The design of Roboethics requires the combined  commitment of experts of several disciplines, who, working in  transnational projects, committees, commissions, have to  adjust laws and regulations to the problems resulting from the scientific and technological achievements in Robotics.   In all likelihood, we will witness the birth of new curricula  studiorum and specialities, necessary to manage a subject so complex, juts as it happened with Forensic Medicine.   In particular, we mention the following fields as the main  to be involved in Roboethics: Robotics, Computer Science,  Artificial Intelligence, Philosophy, Ethics, Theology, Biology,  Physiology, Cognitive Sciences, Neurosciences, Law, Sociology, Psychology, Industrial Design.  IV.  T HE EURON R OBOETHICS ATELIER  EURON is the European Robotics Research Network, aiming to promote excellence in robotics by creating resources  and exchanging the knowledge we already have, and by  looking to the future.   One major product of EURON is a robotics research  roadmap designed to clarify opportunities for developing and  613
employing advanced robot tec hnology over the next 20 years.  The document provides a comprehensive review of state of the  art robotics and identifies the major obstacles to progress.    The main goals of the roadmapping activity are to identify the current driving forces, objectives, bottlenecks and key  challenges for robotics research, so as to develop a focus and a  draft timetable for robotics research in the next 20 years.  A. The Roboethics Atelier   In 2005, EURON funded the Roboethics Atelier Project,  coordinated by Scuola di Robotica, with the aim of drawing  the first Roboethics Roadmap.   Once the profile of the Euron Roadmap project had been  discussed and its frame identified, the selection of participants started. This was done on the basis of: a) their participation to  previous activities on Techno/Roboethics, b) their crosscultural attitude, c) their interest in applied ethics.   The last step in the process involved a series of  discussions via e-mail which led to the definition of the Programme. Participants were asked to prepare a major  contribution on their area of expertise, and on a few more on  topics they were interested to discuss, even outside their realm of expertise. The organizers promoted the cross-cultural and  transdisciplinary contributions.  B. The Roboethics Roadmap   The ultimate purpose of the Roboethics Roadmap is to provide a systematic assessment of the ethical issues involved  in the Robotics R&D; to increase the understanding of the  problems at stake, and to promote further studying and  transdisciplinary research.   The Roboethics Roadmap outlines the multiple pathways for research and exploration in the field and indicates how they  might be developed. The roadmap embodies the contributions  of more than 50 scientists and technologists, in many fields of investigations from sciences and humanities.   This study hopefully is a useful tool in view of cultural,  religious and ethical differences.   The Roboethics Roadmap should be considered the  number 1 release, a preliminary and non exhaustive taxonomy of sensitive problems of the field.   Let’s see firstly what the Roboethics Roadmap cannot be.  • It is not a Survey, nor a State-of-the-Art of the disciplines  involved. This Roadmap does not aim to offer an  exhaustive picture of the State-of-the-Art in Robotics, nor  a guideline of ethics in science and technology. The  reason is that: a) Robotics is a new science still in the  defining stage. It is in its blossoming phase, taking different roads according to the dominant field of science  undertaken (field Robotics, Humanoids, Biorobotics, and  so on). Almost every day we are confronted with new  developments, fields of applications and synergies with  other sectors; b) Public and private professional associations and networks such as IFR-International  Federation of Robotics, IEEE Robotics and Automation  Society, EUROP - European Robotics Platform, Star Publishing House, have undertaken projects to map the State-of-the-Art in Robotics.  • It is not a list of Questions & Answers. Actually, there are  no easy answers, and the complex fields require careful consideration.  • It is not a Declaration of Principles. The Euron  Roboethics Atelier, and the sideline discussion undertaken, cannot be regarded as the institutional  committee of scientists and experts entitled to draw a  Declaration of Principles on Roboethics.  Scope: Near Future Urgency   In terms of scope, we have taken into consideration –  from the point of view of the ethical issue connected to  Robotics – a temporal range of a decade, in whose frame we  could reasonably locate and infer – on the basis of the current  state-of-the-Art in Robotics – certain foreseeable  developments in the field.   For this reason, we consider premature – and have only  hinted at – problems inherent in the possible emergence of human functions in the robot: like consciousness, free will,  self-consciousness, sense of dignity, emotions, and so on.  Consequently, this is why we have not examined problems – debated in literature – like the need not to consider robot as  our slaves, or the need to guarantee them the same respect, rights and dignity we owe to human workers.   Target: Human Centred Ethics   Likewise, and for the same reasons, the target of this  Roadmap is not the robot and its the artificial ethics, but the  human ethics of the robots’ designers, manufacturers and users.   Although informed about the issues presented in some  papers on the need and possibility to attribute moral values to robots’ decisions, and about the chance that in the future  robots might be moral entities like – if not more than–  human  beings, we have chosen, in the first release of he Roboethics  Roadmap, to examine the ethical issues of the human beings  involved in the design, manufacturing, and use of the robots.  We have felt that problems like those connected to the  application of robotics within the military and the possible use  of military robots against some populations not provided with  this sophisticated technology, as well as problems of terrorism  in robotics and problems connected with biorobotics, implantations and augmentation, were urging and serious  enough to deserve a focused and tailor-made investigation..  It is absolutely clear that without a deep rooting of Roboethics in society, the  premises for the implementation of an artificial  ethics in the robots’ control systems will be missing.   Methodology: Open Work   The Roboethics Roadmap is an Open Work, a Directory  of Topics & Issues, susceptible to further development and improvement which will be defined by events in our  technoscientific-ethical future. We are convinced that the  different components of society working in Robotics, and the  stakeholders in Robotics should intervene in the process of  building a Roboethics Roadmap, in a grassroots science  614
experimental case: the Parliaments, Academic Institutions,  Research Labs, Public ethics committees, Professional Orders,  Industry, Educational systems, the mass-media.  C. Ethical Issues in an ICT society   Roboethics shares many 'sensitive areas' with Computer  Ethics and Information Ethics. But, before that, we have to  take into account the global ethical problems derived from the  Second a Third Industrial Revolutions, in the field of the relationship between Humans and Machines:  • Dual-use technology (every technology can be used and  misused);  • Anthropomorphization of the Machines;  • Humanisation of the Human/Machine relationship  (cognitive and affective bonds toward machines);  • Technology Addiction;  • Digital Divide, socio-technological Gap (per ages, social  layer, per world areas);  • Fair access to technological resources;  • Effects of technology on the global distribution of wealth  and power;  • Environmental impact of technology.  From the Computer and Information Ethics we borrow the  known Codes of Ethics called PAPA, acronym of: privacy,  accuracy, intellectual property and access.  • Privacy: What information about one's self or one's  associations must a person reveal to others, under what  conditions and with what safeguards? What things can  people keep to themselves and not be forced to reveal to others?  • Accuracy: Who is responsible for the authenticity, fidelity  and accuracy of information? Similarly, who is to be held accountable for errors in information and how is the  injured party to be made whole?  • Property: Who owns information? What are the just and  fair prices for its exchange? Who owns the channels, especially the airways, through which information is  transmitted? How should access to this scarce resource be  allocated?  • Accessibility: What information does a person or an  organization have a right or a privilege to obtain, under what conditions and with what safeguards?    Questions raised on the range of application of sensitive technologies, and on the uncertainty of performance of these  are raised in connection to neuro-robotics:  • Under what conditions should we decide that deployment  is acceptable?   • At what point in the development of the technology is an  increase in deployment acceptable?  • How do we weigh the associated risks against the possible  benefits?  • What the rate of the ethics of functional compensation or  repair vs. enhancement? This issue is especially notable regarding the problem of augmentation: In some cases a  technology is regarded as a way of compensating for some  function that is lacking compared to the majority of  humans; in other cases, the same technology might be  considered an enhancement over and above that which the  majority of humans have. Are there cases where such  enhancement should be considered unethical?   • Are there cases where a particular technology itself should  be considered unacceptable even though it has potential for compensation as well as enhancement?   The question of identifying cause, and assigning responsibility, should some harm result from the deployment of robotic technology. (Wagner, J.J, David M. Cannon, D.M.,  Van der Loos).  D. The precautionary principle   Problems of the delegation and accountability to and within technology are daily life problems of every one of us.  Today, we give responsibility for  crucial aspects of our  security, health, life saving, and so on to machines.    Professional are advised to apply, in performing sensitive  technologies the precautionary principle:  "When an activity raises threats of harm to human health  or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken  even if some cause-and-effect relationships are not fully established scientifically."    From the precautionary principle derive some other rules  such as: non-instrumentalisation, non-discrimination, informed  consent and equity, sense of reciprocity, data protection.   The aim of this roadmap is to open a debate on the ethical basis which should inspire the design and development of  robots, to avoid to be forced to become conscious of the  ethical basis under the pressure of grievous events. We believe  that precaution should not produce paralysis of science and  technology.  V.  T HE ROBOETHICS TAXONOMY  In the period of a year, the Euron Roboethics Atelier has  carried out a tour d’horizon  of the Fields in Robotics: an  overview of the state of the art in Robotics, and of the main ethical issues, driven by the most recent techno-scientific  developments, which can only just be glimpsed.  A taxonomy of Robotics is not a simple task, simply  because the field is in a full bloom. A classification of  Robotics is a work in progress, done simultaneously with the  development of the discipline itself.   Aware of the classifications produced by the main Robotics organizations, which differ from one another on the  basis of the approach – technological/applicational -,  we have  preferred, in the case of the Roboethics Roadmap, to collect the many Robotics fields from a typological standpoint,  according to shared homogeneity of the problems of interface  towards the society.    Instead of an encyclopedic approach, we have followed -  with few modifications - the classification of EURON  615
Robotics Research Roadmap. For every field, we have tried to  analyze the current situation rather than the imaginable. Thus,  we have decided to give priority to issues in applied ethics  rather than to theoretical generality. It should be underlined that the present grid is not exhaustive; it is the first release of  the Roboethics Roadmap, susceptible to be improved, and  corrected.   Here below the chapter of the Roadmap devoted to  humanoids, as emerged from the contributions of the Participants to the Atelier, and from a broad array of  documentation.  VI.  H UMANOIDS AND ROBOETHICS  One of the most ambitious aims of Robotics is to design an autonomous robot that could reach - and even surpass -  human intelligence and performance in partially unknown, changing, and unpredictable environments.   “Essentially, it is expected that a robot will provide  assistance in housework, for aged people and for entertainment  to keep up the amenity of life and human environment in the  next century. A type of human robot, a Humanoid is expected, to work together with human partners in our living  environment, and it will share the same working space and will  experience the same thinking and behaviour patterns as a  human being. The robot will integrate information from  sensors and show coordinated actions which realize a high level of communication with a human without any special  training using multimedia such as speech, facial expression  and body movement” (source, Waseda Humanoid Robotics Institute)   A. Artificial Mind   In the Roadmap, we limited ourselves to defining  intelligence from an engineering point of view, that is, an operational intelligence – although we are aware of the fact  that our terminology regarding robots’ functions is often taken  from the language used for human beings.   The Artificial Intelligence shall be able to lead the robot  to fulfill the missions required by the end-users. To achieve this goal, over the past decades scientists are working on AI  techniques in many fields.    From our point of view, one of the fundamental aspects of  the robots is their capability to learn: to learn the  characteristics of the surrounding environment, that is, a) the physical environment, but also b) the living beings who inhabit  it. This means that robots working in a given environment have  to recognize human beings from other objects.  In addition to learning about the environment, robots have to learn about  their own behavior, through a self reflective process. They  have to learn from the experience, replicating somehow the  natural processes of the evolution of intelligence in living  beings (synthesis procedures, trying-and-error, learning by doing, and so on).    All these processes embodied in the robots produce a  kind of intelligent machine endowed with the capability to express a certain degree of autonomy. It follows that a robot can behave , in some situations, in a way which is  unpredictable for their human designers.   Basically, the increasing autonomy of the robots could give rise to unpredictable and non predictable behaviours.   So, without necessarily imagining some Sci-Fi scenarios  where robot are provided with consciousness, free will and  emotions, in a few years we are going to cohabit with robots  endowed with self knowledge and autonomy – in the engineering meaning of these words.  B. Artificial Body   Humanoids are robots whose body structure resembles the  human one. They answer to an old dream of humanity, and certainly do not spring only from rational, engineering or  utilitarian motivations, but also from psycho-anthropological  ones.  Humanoids are the expression of one of the demands of our  European culture, that is that humankind were the creator of some mechanical being of the shape of a human. In the  Japanese culture, it is the demand to carefully replicate nature  in all its forms. It is a very difficult and demanding enterprise, a project of the  level of the Mission to the Moon. But, precisely for its  characteristic of being one of humanity's' dreams, the  investments are high and the progress speed very quick.   It has been forecasted that in a not so distant future we will cohabit with humanoids whose shape will be so similar to  that of human beings that it will render it possible to get mixed  up – in certain situations - with the latter. Humanoids will  assists human operators in human environments, will replace  human beings, and will cooperate with human beings in many ways.   Given the high cost and the delicacy of the humanoids,  they will probably be employed in tasks and in environments where the human shape would really be needed, that is, in all  these situations where the human-robot interaction is primary,  compared to any other mission - human-robot interactions in  health care; children/disable people/elderly assistance; baby  sitting; office clerks, museum guides; entertainers, sexual robots, and so on. Or, they will be employed as testimonials  for commercial products.   In the frame of this Roadmap, there was no need to  closely examine the technological aspects of humanoids  (actuators, artificial muscles; robot path planning; visual aspect and the realization of emotion in humanoid robots;  expressions of verbal and non verbal information in robots;  environment and human recognition; of human faces; humanmachine communication interface; and so on). Many of these  technologies comes from bio-robotics; and many, born in the humanoids labs, are and will be applied to bio-robotics.  C. Benefits  • Intelligent machines can assist humans to perform very  difficult tasks, and behave like true and reliable  companions in many ways.  616
• Humanoids are robots so adaptable and flexible that will  be rapidly used in many situations and circumstances.  • Their shape, and the sophisticated human-robot  interaction, will be very useful for those situation where a  human shape is needed.  • Faced with an aging population, the Japanese society see  humanoids robots as one way to enable people to continue  to lead an active and productive life in their old age,  without being a burden to other people.   • The researches carried out in humanoids laboratories over  the world will have as a side effects the development of platform to study human body, for training, haptic test and  trainings, with extraordinary outcomes on health care, education, edutainment, and so on.  D. Problems  • Reliability of the internal evaluation systems of the robots.  • Unpredictability of robots’ behaviour.   • Traceability of evaluation/actions procedures.  • Identification of robots.   • Safety. Wrong action can lead to dangerous situation for  living beings and the environment.  • Security. In the case the autonomy of the robot were  controlled by ill-intentioned people, who can modify the  robot’s behavior in a dangerous and fraudulent course.  Because humanoids sum up almost all the characteristics of the  whole spectrum of robots, their use implies the emergence of  nearly all the problems we are examining below. In particular, their introduction in human environments, workplaces, homes,  schools, hospitals, public places, offices, and so on, will  deeply and dramatically modify our society.  We have forecasted problems connected to:  • Replacement of human beings (economic problems;  human unemployment; reliability; dependability; and so  on)  • Psychological problems (deviations in human emotions,  problems of attachment, disorganization in children, fears, panic, confusion between real and artificial, feeling of  subordination towards robots).  • Well before evolving to become conscious agents,  humanoids can be an extraordinary tool used to control human beings.  E. Recommendations  Activate working groups inside Standards Committees to  study the possibility to define international technical/legal  rules for commercial robots regarding:  • Safety. We should provide for systems for the control of  robots’ autonomy. Operators should be able to limit  robots’ autonomy when the correct robot’s behaviour is not guaranteed.  • Security: H/W and S/W keys to avoid inappropriate or  illegal use of the robot • Traceability: as in the case of sensitive systems, we should  provide for systems like the aircraft’s black box, to be able  to register and document robot’s behaviours.  • Identifiability: as cars and other vehicles, also robots  should have identification numbers and serial numbers.  • Privacy: H/W and S/W systems to encrypt and passwordprotect sensitive data needed to the robot to perform its tasks or acquired during its activity.  VII.  C ONCLUSIONS  Following the Atelier, the next planned steps are: The dissemination and Internet discussion of the Release  1.# of the Roadmap by a larger community of interested  scientists who could/did not participate to the Atelier, but who, for good reasons, expressed their commitment to send  comments and review. (More than 50 robotics scientists and  experts in Computer Ethics and Science&Ethics from Europe, USA and Japan expressed their interest).    The promotion of a cross-cultural updates for engineering  scientists who wish to monitor the medium and long effects of  applied robotics technologies.   The promotion among robotic scientists of the spirit of the Fukuoka World Robot Declaration ( 2004), that is summarized  by the following points: 1. Next-generation robots will be partners that coexist with  human beings;  2. Next-generation robots will assist human beings both  physically and psychologically;  3. Next-generation robots will contribute to the realisation of  a safe and peaceful society.  A CKNOWLEDGMENT  The author thanks Fiorella Operto for her invaluable contribution to the Roboethics endeavor.  R EFERENCES [1] Asimov, I, Runaround, Astounding Science Fiction, March 1942.  Republished in Robot Visions by Isaac Asimov, Penguin, 1991  [2] Asimov, I., I Robot, Doubleday, 1950  [3] Capurro, R. (2000), Ethical Challenges of the Information Society in the  21st Century, “International Information & Library Review” 32, 257-276  [4] Floridi, L., Information Ethics: On the Philosophical Foundation of  Computer Ethics, Ethicomp98, The Fourth International Conference on Ethical Issues of Information Technology, Erasmus University, The Netherlands, 25/27 March 1998  [5] Floridi, L., Sanders, J. W., On the Morality of Artificial Agents,  Information Ethics Groups, University .  [6] Galvan, J.M., On Technoethics, in «IEEE-RAS Magazine» 10 (2003/4)  58-63.   [7] Gips, J., Towards the Ethical Robot, published in Android Epistemology,  K. Ford, C. Glymour and Hayes, P., MIT Press, 1995 (http://www.cs.bc.edu/~gips/EthicalRobot.pdf)   617
