(DRAFT - 9 Oct 2018 - comments on draft to AIstatement@thepublicvoice.org)   1   Universal Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence  23 October 2018 Brussels, Belgium  New developments in Artificial Intelligence are transforming the world, from science and industry to government administration and finance. The rise of AI decision-making also implicates fundamental rights of fairness, accountability, and democracy. Modern data analysis produces outcomes that have real life consequences for people in employment, housing, credit, commerce, and criminal sentencing. Many of these techniques are entirely opaque, leaving individuals unaware whether the decisions were accurate, fair, or even about them.   We propose these Universal Guidelines to guide the design and use of AI. These Guidelines should be incorporated into ethical standards, adopted in national law and international agreements, and built into the design of systems.  We state clearly that the primary responsibility for the AI systems must reside with those institutions that develop and deploy these systems  1. Right to Transparency. All individuals have the right to know the basis of an AI decision that concerns them. This includes access to the factors, the logic, and techniques that produced the outcome.  2. Right to Human Determination. All individuals have the right to a final determination made by a person.   3. Identification Obligation. The true operator of an AI system must be made known to the public.  4. Accountability Obligation. Institutions must be responsible for decisions made by an AI system.  5. Fairness Obligation. Institutions must ensure that AI systems do not reflect bias or make impermissible discriminatory decisions.  6. Accuracy, Reliability, Validity, and Replicability Obligations. Institutions must ensure the accuracy, reliability, validity, and replicability of decisions.    
(DRAFT - 9 Oct 2018 - comments on draft to AIstatement@thepublicvoice.org)   2 7. Data Quality Obligation.  Institutions must ensure data provenance, quality, and relevance for the data input into algorithms. Secondary uses of data collected for AI processing must not exceed the original purpose of collection.   8. Public Safety Obligation. Institutions must assess the public safety risks that arise from the deployment of AI systems that direct or control physical devices.  9. Cybersecurity Obligation. Institutions must secure AI systems against cybersecurity threats.   10. Prohibition on Secret Profiling. No institution shall establish or maintain a secret profile on an individual.  11. Prohibition on National Scoring. No national government shall establish or maintain a score on its citizens or residents.  12. Termination Obligation. An institution that has established an AI system has an affirmative obligation to terminate the system if it will lose control of the system.  The following experts and civil society organizations support the Universal Guidelines:  (List the signatories)     -  
