     Social Principles of Human -Centric AI        TABLE OF CONTENTS       1 Introduction            1         2 Basic Philosophy            4          3 Social Changes Needed to Realize Society 5.0 - "AI-Ready Society"     5       4  Social Principles of Human -Centric AI         7  4.1 Social Principles  of AI          7  4.2 R&D  and U tilization  Principles of AI        11      5 Conclusion           11        Appendix   About  the Establishment of the " Council for  Social Principles  of Human- centric AI " 12   
1     1 Introduction     Our m odern society faces many challenges  that endanger the survival of humankind such  as global environmental problems, growing economic disparity, and the depletion of resources.   Japan is the fi rst country to tackle  many social  issues confronting a mature society, such as  the declining birthrate and aging population, labor shortage, rural depopulation, and increased  fiscal spending. Artificial Intelligence (AI ) is considered a  key technology to rescue society  from these problems , to address  the goals set forth in  the United Nation's  Sustainable  Development Goals  (SDGs ), and to build a sustainable world.   Japan, with the establishment of Society5.01, whose purpose is to address  social issues and  economic development using AI, aims to revitalize its society and economy, to be an  internationally attractive society, and to contribute to the S DGs on a global scale.   Similar to many other types of science and technology, AI will bring  many great benefits  to society, but its large impact on society calls for appropriate development and  implementation.  In order to avoid or reduce the negative aspects in advance while making  effective use of AI to benefit society, we should promote, toget her with the continued research  and development  (R&D)  of technologies related to AI, a transformation into an "AI -Ready  Society" where AI can be used effectively and safely. We need to redesign society in every  way including Japan's human potential , social  systems, industrial structures, innovation  systems, and governance.   Depending on the researcher, there are various ways of thinking about the definition of AI  (Artificial Intelligence ), a central theme of this document, and there is no clear definition at   present.  For example, the EC High -Level Expert G roup report2 defines AI as a system that  performs intelligent operations (which may have some  autonomy) in response to environment  and input. However, the expression "intelligent  operation" itself is somewhat vague and  open  for interpretation. Also, the AI100 Report3 published in the United States in 2016 cites Nils J.  Nilsson's definition4 of AI as a field of research according to which "Artificial intelligence is  that activity d evoted to making machines intelligent, and intelligence is that quality that  enables an entity to function appropriately and wi th foresight in its environment ", but this  definition is also highly ambiguous. In actuality , the vague definition of AI within t he same  report in and of itself has a positive side that is accelerating the study of AI. In light of these  circumstan ces, although there is a certain consensus  on what to judge as  AI or AI technology ,  it does not appear appropriate at this time to define it more strictly.   In addition, various technologies  normally  called "AI" are seldom  used alone but instead  are generally incorporated and used as part of an information system. Advanced and complex                                                      1 Society 5.0 is the future society that Japan aims for, following the Information Society (Society 4.0). A society  that realizes Society 5.0 is a sustainable human -centric society that implements AI, IoT (Internet of Things),  robotics and other cutting- edge technologies to create unprecedented value, and a wide range of people can realize  their own well -being while respecting the well -being of others.  2 High -Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI HLEG), "Draft Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI",  and "A definition of AI: Main capabilities and scientific disciplines", European Commission, Directorate -General  for Communication, December 2018 .  3 Stone, P., et al., "Artificial Intelligence and Life 2030. One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence: Report  of the 2015- 2016 Study Panel", Stanford University, Stanford, CA, Sept. 2016.   4 Nils J. Nilsson, The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A  History of Ideas and Achievements , Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press, 2010.  
2   inform ation systems may incorporate  a broad range of AI te chnolog ies; moreover,  they may  incorporate technologies  reflected in the  principles  stated in this document .  Based on these  two premises , the principles  herein may be regarded as  apply ing to any "highly complex  information systems  in general" that include any such technology. Given such consideration,  we do not define  a particular technology or system as  "AI",  but regard AI as "highly complex  information systems in general" . After discussing some of the impacts  on society, we will  present a set of AI social principles and  identify  some issues to consider  in AI R&D  and social  implementation.  In order to make the ensui ng Society 5.0 as effective  as possible , it is  essential for all relev ant stakeholders to cooperate  and interact  closely with each other .    
3     Figure 1 shows the overall structure of this document.                                             Section 2   Basic Philosophy   Dignity: A society that has respect for human dignity   Diversity & Inclusion: A society where people with diverse backgrounds can pursue  their well- being   Sustainability: A sustainable society   Section 3  Social Changes Needed to Realize Society 5.0 - "AI-Ready Society5"  Human Potential, Social Systems, Industrial Structures,   Innovation Systems (environments that support innovation),  Governance   Section 4  Social Principles of Human -Centric AI   4.1 Social Principles of AI     (1) Human -Centric, (2) Education/Literacy, (3) Privacy Protection,     (4) Ensur ing Security,  (5) Fair Competition,     (6) Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,  (7) Innovation   4.2 R&D and Utilization Principles of AI     Figure 1:  Overall Structure of This Document                                                          5 An "AI -Ready Society" means that society as a whole has undergone the necessary changes to maximize the  benefits of AI, enjoys the benefits of AI, or has introduced AI i mmediately when needed and is in a state of being  able to receive the benefits. It means "a society adapted to the use of AI". For this purpose, society as a whole needs  to be transformed, including individuals, business organizations, and the social innov ation environment.  Individually, for example, everyone should acquire appropriate AI literacy that allows them to use AI for work and  life. In business organizations, meanwhile, corporate activities should be developed with strategies premised on the  use o f AI. In the social innovation environment, all information should be digitized in a form that allows for AI  analysis, should be transformed into data, and should be maintained in a state in which it can be used for AI  development and service provision.   Basic   Philosophy   Vision   (AI-Ready Society)   Social Principles of  Human -Centric AI   R&D and Utilization Principles of AI   (Individual Principles , Guidelines , Guidance , Rules , etc.)  Section  2  Section  3  Section  4   4.1  4.2  
4   2 Basic  Philosophy     AI is expected to contribute significantly to the realization of Society 5.0. We consider AI  important not only to return the benefits obtained from the efficiency and convenience of  using AI to people and society, but also to use AI for the public good of humanity as a whole ,  and to ensure global sustainability outlined in the SDGs through qualitative changes in socia l  conditions and true innovation.   We believe we should respect the following three values as our philosophy and build a  society that pursues their realization.     (1) Dignity : A society that has respect for human dignity     We should not build a society where humans are overly dependent on AI or where AI  is used to control human behavior through the excessive pursuit of efficiency and  convenience. We need to construct a society where human dignity is respected and, by  using A I as a tool, a society where people can better demonstrate their various human  abilities, show greater creativity, engage in challenging work, and live richer lives both  physically and mentally.     (2) Diversity & Inclusion : A society where people with diverse backgrounds can pursue  their own well -being     It is both an ideal in the modern world and a major challenge  to create a society in  which people with diverse backgrounds, values and ways of thinking can pursue their own  well-being while society creates new v alue by flexibly embracing them. AI is a technology  powerful enough to bring us closer to this ideal. We need to change the nature of society  in this way through the appropriate development and deployment of AI.     (3) Sustainability : A sustainable society     We need to use AI to create a succession of new businesses and solutions, resolve social  disparities, and develop a sustainable society that can deal with issues such as global  environmental problems and climate change. Japan, as a leading science and tech nology oriented country, has an obligation to strengthen its accumulated scientific and  technological resources  by utilizing AI and thereby contribut ing to the creation of such a  sustainable society.     
5   3 Social Changes Needed to Realize Society 5.0  "AI -Ready Society"     Technologies expected to contribute to the realization of Society 5.0 include AI, IoT,  Robotics, and ultra -high-speed broadband communication networks. Even if it becomes  possible to some extent to entrust complex processes to machines using AI, it is still necessary  for humans to set objectives that answer the question "What are we using AI for?"  While AI  can be used to better society, it might also be used for undesirable purposes or in inappropriate  ways unconsciously. For this reason, we are advancing technological developments in terms  of Human  Potential, S ocial Systems,  Industrial Structures, Innovation Systems, and  Governance which can answer the question "What are we using AI for?" while paying close  attention to their interactio n with the progress of technology.  These five aspects are equally  important in achieving Society 5.0.     (1) Human Potential     In an "AI -Ready Society" that is responsive  to the spread of AI to  every corner of society, how  human beings respond to AI is the key to realizing a society where AI can be fully utilized. T o that  end, the expected abilities and roles of people  are as follows.   A) People should fully understand the advantages and disadvantag es of AI. In particular, people  should have the ability to recognize that biases are included in the algorithms and/or data that  will become the information resources of AI, and for example, that these biases may be used   for undesirable purposes.  In addit ion, people should recognize that there are three types of data  bias: statistical bias, bias caused b y social conditions, and bias arising from malicious  intent  among AI users.   B) It is preferred that the use of AI will create an environment in which many peo ple can engage  in highly creative and productive work. To that end, it is expected that a diverse range of people  will acquire the ability to realize their own dreams and ideas with AI's support despite many  differences in origin, culture, taste , and so on. An education system that achieve s these goals as  well as social systems that contribute to their achievement must be realized.   C) It is important to have  sufficient human resources with  acquired application skills such as  implementation and design of AI systems and a basic knowledge of data and AI . These skills  would be acquired in a cross- disciplinary range of fields in a combined and integrated  framework. It is expected that such human resources will be the driving force of all activities in  society, and that the capabilities of those people will contribute to the formation of an AI -based   living environment. Given the establishment  of such a living environment, we must implement  social system s that allow many people to live a richer and more fulfi lling life .    (2) Social Systems     The use of AI will most likely accelerate the evolution of individual service solutions and create  various benefits from improved efficiency and individualization. In order to embrace the full benefits  of this change in society, it is necessary for entire social systems including health care, finance,  insurance , transportation, energy, and others to flexibly change and respond to the evolution of AI.  This includes simple efficiency in light of existing socially accepted objectives (such as improved  convenience and liberation from simple labor tasks ). It also  includes  the realization of new value   potentially  created by diversification and fluidization of objectives and resolving  negative outcomes   (such as inequality, wideni ng disparity, social exclusion, and so on) that may result from  the evolution  of AI.   To this end, we need to implement flexible architecture designs equipped with mechanisms for  expandability, interoperability, developing improved social order, and so on, both  in the  software and  the hardware  aspects of each social system. Additionally, we need to establish a common data 
6   utilization infrastructure for various social systems, in particular to ensure interoperability and  connectivity.     (3) Industrial Structures     In order for a diverse group of people to realize their assorted dreams and ideas, it is necessary for  labor as well as employment and entrepreneur environments to be flexible and internationally  open.  For this reason, companies should compete fairly and p romote flexible working style s, human  creativity should continually  be demonstrated throughout industries , and investment in start up  businesses should be promoted.     (4) Innovation Systems  (environments that support innovation)     It is necessary for universities, research institutions, industries,  and the public at large   to participate in AI's R&D, utilization and evaluation across fields and positions,  stimulating each other, and creating an environment in which innovation can flourish.   To that end, all types of data including real space data should be instantaneously and  securely available at a l evel that AI  can analyze. Additionally, it is advisable to ensure   privacy and security  so that everyone can provide and distribute data with  ease, and for  there to be an environment where they  can benefit from the data that  they have provided.   It is advisable to accelerate the desired development of AI  by establishing an  environment in which those involved in R&D , including users, can safely conduct R&D  and utilization of AI, and the cycle of R&D and utilization can move rapidly.  Preferably,  the utilization of AI will create  new ideas and possibilities, and significantly expand the  potential of innovation.     (5) Governance     It is always necessary to continue to update the  content and defined purposes discussed  in the above -mentioned sections Human  Potential, Social S ystems,  Industrial S tructures,   and I nnovati on Systems in line with social changes and technological  developments.   For that reason , it is necessary to have a system that can be implemented and in place  for various stakeholders, including government, industr y, universities, research  institutions, and the general public . Then they will be able to work toge ther on such  matters as  identifying  issues, evaluat ing impacts, and mak ing decisions on regulatory  governance including rules, systems, standardization and codes of conduct. Additionally,  it is necessary to listen to people,  including those who have a diff icult time having  their  opinions heard, in addition the various stakeholders, and to establish a system that  continuously addresses the most advanced social and technical issues. When  implementing such governance, flexible and effective measures  should be taken not only  in terms of  the law  but also by means of industr ies with appropriate  technical means   taking the initiative . In addition, international coordination for governance is important,  and in addition to governance in each individual country, an int ernational system of  cooperation for dealing with cross -border problems should be established.     
7   4  Social Principles of Human -Centric AI     We recognize that in order to realize an "AI -Ready Society" and to promote an appropriate  and proactive social implementation of AI, it is important to establish basic principles that  each stakeholder should keep in mind.   In order for AI to be accepted and properly used by society, w e will systemize these  basic  principles into "Social Principles of AI" to which society (especially state legislative and  administrative bodies) should pay attention, and "R&D and Util ization Principles of AI" to  which  developers and operators engaged in AI R&D and social implementation should pay  attention. The "Social Principl es of AI" necessary for realizing a society with the three basic  principles listed in Section  2, and the "R&D and Utilization Principles of AI" that developers  and business operators should consider , are as follows:     4.1 Social Principles  of AI    Social Pri nciples of AI are principles relating to social frameworks that should be  implemented across  Japan ese society including national and local governments as well as in  multilateral frameworks in an "AI -Ready Society."     (1) The Human -Centric Principle     The utilization of AI must not infringe upon the fundamental human rights guaranteed  by the Constitution and international  standards .  AI should be developed, utilized, and implemented in society to expand the abilities of  people and allow diverse people to pur sue their own well -being.  In a society  making use  of AI , it is desirable that we introduce appropriate mechanisms for literacy education and  for the promotion of proper use of AI so that people do not become over -dependent on AI  or misuse AI to manipulate other people's decision- making.    AI can expand human abilities and creativity not only by replacing aspects  of human  labor but also by assisting humans as a technologi cally advanced tool.    When using AI, people must  judge and decide for themselves how to use it . The  appropriate  stakeholders involved in the developme nt, delivery and utilization of  AI should be  responsible  for the consequences of AI utilization, depending on the  nature of the problem.    In the process of  AI deployment , each stakeholder should take into co nsideration  the user -friendliness of the system in order to allow all people  to enjoy the benefits  of AI and avoid creating a digital divide with  so-called "information poor" or  "technology poor " people left  behind.     (2) The Principle of Education/ Literacy     In a soc iety premised  on AI, we do not desire  to create disparities or divisions between  people or  create those who are socially disadvantaged . Therefore, policy makers and  managers of businesses involved in AI must have an a ccurate understanding of AI,  knowledge  and ethics permitting appropriate  use of AI in society. They should take  into  account the complex ity of AI and appreciate the possibility that AI could be  intentional 
8   misuse d. AI users should have a  general understanding  of AI and should acquire  sufficient education to use it  properly , given that  AI platforms are  much more  complicated  than already developed  conventional tools. Regarding  developer s of AI ,  meanwhile,  it is of course necessary for them to master the basics of AI technology.   Additionally , from the viewpoint of developing AI that is useful to society, it is  important for developers  to learn business models for how AI can be used in society , as  well as to master a wide range of liberal arts such as soci al sciences and ethics including   normative  consciousness .  From this point of view, we believe that an educational  environment that fosters  education and literacy in accord ance with  the following principles  must be provided  equally to all people.    In order to prevent generating  disparities between people or to create socially  vulnerable  individuals , opportunities for education in a wide range of literacy  skills   are to  be provided in early childhood education and primary and secondary  education. Opportunities are also to be provided for the reeducation of w orking  adults and the elderly .   With regard to  literac y education and skills required to use AI , our society needs an   education al system that allows anyone  to acquire the basics of AI, mathematics,  and  data science.  All people need to learn beyond the boundaries of literature and  science.  It is also necessary to prepare content in literacy education on the limits of  security and AI technology in order to raise awareness of AI and data  characteristics . These characteristics include  bias in data, the possibility of causing   bias depending on how AI is used , and  issues of fairness, impartiality , and p rivacy  protection that are inherent ly needed  in the use of AI.    In a society where AI is pervasive, it is to be expected that the educational  environment will change from the current unilateral  and uniform teaching style to  one that makes use of individual interests and skill sets . For that reason, so ciety as  a whole shares a sense that the education system is always changing  flexibly to the  optimal fo rm of teaching regardless of previous  successful experiences in the  educational environment  to date .  In education, it is desirable  to have  an inte ractive  educational environment for the prevention of  dropouts and an environment  that  fully utilizes AI technologies to allow students to work together.    It is desirable not to impose a n unnecessary  burden only on the administration or  schools (teachers), but to work independently with private enterprises and citizens  toward the development of such an educational environment.    (3) The Principle of Privacy Protection     Not all AI technologies increase the risk associated with the use  of personal data, but  in a society premised on AI, it is still possible to gauge  each person's political position,  economic situation, personal hobbies, personal preferences, and so forth with great   accuracy based on data about matters  such as data subject's  individual behavior. This  means, when utilizing AI, that more careful discretion may be required than the mere  handling of personal data in accordance with  the level of importance and sensitivity  of  the data. Each stakeholder must handle personal data based on the following principles  to ensure that no individuals are  disadvantaged  from the unexpected distribution or use 
9   of personal data in undesirable ways .     We should make sure that any  AI using  personal data and any service solutions that  use AI, including use  by the government, do not infringe on a person's individual  freedom , dignity or  equality.    If the use of AI threatens to  increase the possibility of harm ing individuals, technical  mechanisms and non- technical frameworks should be developed to reduce the risk .  In particular, AI using personal data should have me chanisms to ens ure accuracy  and legitimacy , and to allow individuals to be substantially involved in managing  the privacy of the ir personal  data. This would make  it possible for people to provide  personal data with peace o f mind when using AI, and effectively benefit from the  data they provide.    Personal data must  be protected appropriately according to it s degree  of importance  and sensitivity . Personal  data contains a variety of informati on, ranging  from  matters  that are highly likely to have a great influence on an individual 's rights and  interests  (these would typically  be personal thoughts, beliefs, medi cal history,  criminal records, and so on),  to matters  that are semi -public in nature in a person's   social life. Keeping this in mind , we need to pay close attention to the balance  between the use of, and need for protection of , personal data based on the cultural  background and common understanding of society.    (4) The Principle of Ensuring  Security     The active  use of AI automates many social systems  and greatly improves safety . On  the other hand, at least within th e scope of current ly available  technologies, it  is not  always possible for AI to respond appropriately to rare events or deliberate attacks.  Therefore, the use of AI poses a new set of risks to security. Society should always be  aware of the balance between the benef its and risks, and endeavor  to improve social  safety and sustainability as a whole.    Society  must promote broad, deep research and development  related to AI (from  immediate measures to deep essential understanding), such as the proper assessment  of risks in the utilization of AI and research to reduce risks. Society must make firm   efforts to conduct  risk management including  the safeguard  of cyb ersecurity.    Society should always pay attention to sustainability in the use of AI Society, in  particular, must not be uniquely dependent on just one type  of AI  or a few specific  types of AI.     (5) The Principle of Fair Competition     A fair competitive environment must be maintained in order to create new businesses  and services, to maintain sustainable economic growth, and to present  solutions to social  challenges .     Even if resources related to AI are concentrated in a specific countr y, we must not  have a society where unfair  data collection and infringement of sovereignty are  performed under that country's  dominant position.   Even if resources rel ated to AI are concentrated into specific companies , we must 
10   not have a  society where unfair data collection and unfair competition take place  using their  dominant position.    The use of AI should not generate a situation where wealth and social influence are  unfairly biased  towa rds certain  stakeholders .    (6) The Principle  of Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency     In an "AI- Ready Society", it is necessary to ensure fairness and transparency in  decision -making , appropriate accountability for the results , and trust in  the technology ,  so that people who use AI are not subject to  undue discriminatio n with regard to  personal  background, or to unfair treatment  in terms  of human dignity.     Under AI's design concept, all people are treated fairly without unjustified  discrimination on the grounds of diverse backgrounds such as race, gender,  nationality, age, political beliefs, religion, and so on.    Appropriate explanations should be given on a  case- by-case basis depen ding on the  application of AI and each particular situation , including such  things as when AI is  being used, how the  AI data is obtained and used, and what m easures have been  taken  to ensure the appropriateness  of results obtained from AI operations.    In order for people to understand AI's proposals and make judgments on them , there  should be appropriate opportunities for an open dialogue , as required, regarding the  use, adoption, and operation of AI.    Taking into account the above viewpoints and in order to use AI safely in society,  a mechanism must be establish ed to ensure  trust in AI, and in the data and  algorithms that support  it.    (7) The Principle of Innovation     To realize  Society 5.0 and aim for continuous innovation that advances as people  evolve together with AI  development , we should transcend  boundaries such as  national borders, industries, academia, governments, race, gender, nationality, age,  political convictions an d religion. We should promote total  globalization,  diversification, and industry -academia- government  cooperation in both human   resources and research , based on a wide range of kno wledge, perspectives, ideas , and  so on.   We must promote equal collaboration among universities, research institut ions and  companies, and the flexible movement of human resources.    To implement AI efficiently and safely in society, methods for confirming  the quality  and reliability of AI, and for efficient collection and  maintenance of data used by AI  must b e promoted. In addition to establishing AI engineering such as methods for the  development, testing and operation of AI , it is necessary to promote the establishment  and development of a wide range of studies such as e thical and economic aspects  of  AI.   To ensure the sound development of AI technology, while securing privacy and 
11   security, it is necessary to establish a platform environment  where data from all fields  can be effectively  utilized  across national borders without being monopolized. In  addition, to promote research on AI, R&D environment s should be established where   computer resources and high- speed networks that promote international collaborat ion  and accelerate AI are shared and used.    The government must proceed with  regulatory reforms  to reduce impeding factors in  all related fields  in order to establish  an efficient and beneficial society with the  aid  of AI technologies .    4.2 AI R&D  and Utilization  Principle s    We believe that developers and business operators of AI should establish and comply with  the AI development and utilization principles based on the fundamental philosophy  and social  principles of AI outlined above.   Since many countries, organizations , companies, and so on are currently discussing AI  development and utilization principle s, we believe it is important to create an international  consensus quickly through open discussions, and share results  internationally in a nonregulatory, non- binding framework.     5 Conclusion     In order to lead the world in building the first "AI -Ready Society," Japan should share t he  principles  herein  with the government, related industries, organizations, and so on, and reflect  them in government policies.   In addition, Japan should share these principles with other countries around the world and  take a leadership  role in international discussions with the goal  of establishing  an AI -Ready  Society worldwide . In doing so, Japan should present to the world a social  image of Society  5.0 that supports the realization of the SDGs, and should contribute to cooperative and creative  new development of the international community.   These principles should be flexibly revised in the future according to the progress of AI related technologies, social changes, changes in the world situation, and many other factors.    
12    [Appendix]       Establishment of the " Council for Social Principles of Human- centric AI "    February 15, 2019   AI Strategy Expert Meeting for Strength and Promotion of the Innovation Decision       1. The "Council for Social Principles of Human -centric AI " (hereinafter the "Council ") is  established, under t he AI Strategy Expert Meeting for Strength and Promotion of the  Innovation, for the purpose  of examining the basic principles for implementing and sharing  AI in a better way and reflecting it in AI strategy.  Based on discussions in the "Review  Council for Social Principles of Human- centric AI " established  under the Artificial  Intelligence Technology Strategy Council , this C ouncil will examine " Social Principles  of  Human -centric AI " and propose them to the Integrated Innovation Strategy Promotion  Council.    2. The Chair person , Vice -Chairperson, and members of the Council  are as described in the  attachment.     3. The Council  as a rule will be open to the public. However, this will not be the case when  the Chair person deems it appropriate not to make the proceedings  public .    4. The Chair person will make the contents of discussion at Council  meeting s publicly  available by publishing the minutes of meetings and any other appropriate means.  However,  when the Chairperson deems it appropriate not to make public  the cont ents of discussion at  Council  meetings, all or part of the contents may remain  undisclosed.     5. The Cabinet Office with the cooperation of relevant administrative agencies will handle t he  general affairs of Council  meetings.     6. The Chair person  shall determine any matters concerning t he operation of Council meetings  and other necessary matters not previously listed in preceding clauses.     
13      (Attachment)     "Council for Social Principles of Human- centric AI "   Chair person, Vice -Chair person, and Members     ◎ Chair person   Osamu SUDOH  Professor,  Graduate School of Interdis ciplinary Information  Studies, The University of Tokyo; Dire ctor of the  Center for  Research and Development of Higher Education, The  University of Tokyo   〇 Vice -Chair person   Hiroaki KITANO  Chair, Task Force on Principles of AI Applications , Committee  on New Industry and Technology, Japan Business Federation  (Keidanren) ;  President and CEO, Sony Computer Science  Laboratories, Inc.   〇 Members   Kazuto ATAKA  Professor, Faculty of Environment and Information Studies,  Keio University; Chief Strategy Officer, Yahoo Japan  Corporation   Toshio IWAMOTO  Principle Executive  Advisor, NTT Data Corporation  Shinichi URAKAWA Director and Managing Executive Officer , Sompo Japan  Nipponkoa Insurance Inc.   Arisa  EMA  Project Assistant Professor, Policy Alternatives Research  Institute , The University of Tokyo   Takehiro OHYA  Professor, Keio University Faculty of Law   Ryota KANAI  CEO  and Co-founder, Ar aya, Inc.   Yutaka  KIDA WARA Director  General of AI Science Research and Development  Promotion Center , National Institute of Information and  Communications Technology   Yasuo KUNIYOSHI  Professor, School of Information Science and Technology, The  University of Tokyo; Director of Next Generation Artificial  Intelligence Research Center, the University of Tokyo   Noriko KONDO  Secretary General , the Study Group for Elderly -assisting  Technologies  
14   Satoshi SEKIGUCHI  Vice- President , National Institute of Advanced Industrial  Science and Technology   Isamu TAKAHARA  General Manager , BR-Frontier Research in Policy and  Technology Dep artment,  Toyota Motor Corporation; Director   and Special Appointed Prof essor, R &D Center for Frontiers of  MIRAI in Policy and Technology , University of Tsukuba   Haruo TAKEDA  Corporate Chief Engineer , Hitachi  Ltd.  Hiroshi NAKAGAWA  Group Director, RIKEN  Center for Advanced Intelligence  Project   Miho NAGANUMA  Manager, Corporate  Technology Division, NEC Corporation  Hinae NIORI  CEO, manma, Inc.   Yutaka HATTORI  Executive Board Member , Japan Medical Association   Tomoyuki HIGUCHI  Executive Director of Research Organization of Information  and Systems; Director -General of The Institute of Statistical  Mathematics   Susumu HIRANO  Dean, Chuo University Graduate School of Policy Studies;  Professor, Chuo University Facul ty of Policy Studies   Shinnosuke FUKUOKA  Partner , Nishimura & Asahi  Koichi HORI  Professor, Graduate School of Engineering , The University of  Tokyo   Yutaka MATSUO  Chairman of  Japan Deep Learning Association  (JDLA)   Hiroshi MARUYAMA  PFN Fellow,  Preferred Networks, Inc.   Hiroshi YAMAKAWA  Director of the Dwang o Artificial Intelligence Laboratory ,  Dwango Co., Ltd.   END 
