1 AI PORTUGAL 2030 PORTUGUESE NA TIONAL  INITIA TIVE ON DIGIT AL SKILLSAI PORTUGAL  2030 An innovation and growth strategy  to foster Artificial Intelligence in  Portugal in the European context
2 AI PORTUGAL 2030Promoted through the Coordination Office of INCoDe.2030 Initiative in close cooperation with the Portuguese  Science and Technology Foundation (FCT), The Portuguese Innovation Agency (ANI), Ciência Viva and the  Portuguese Agency for Administrative Modernisation (AMA).
3 AI PORTUGAL 2030AI PORTUGAL  2030PORTUGUESE NA TIONAL  INITIA TIVE ON DIGIT AL SKILLS An innovation and growth strategy to foster Artificial  Intelligence in Portugal in the European context
AI PORTUGAL 2030 a dynamic and evolutive process SEPTEMBER 2016 initial preparation  of INCoDe.2030,  a national  initiative to foster  digital skills APRIL 2017 formal launching of  INCoDe.2030, with five  lines of action: inclusion,  education, qualification  for employment,  specialisation and  research7 DECEMBER 2017  First National  Forum on  Digital Skills -  INCoDe.2030,  including specific  sessions on AI JANUARY 2018 Portugal  participates actively  in the preparation  of the “European  AI declaration”  with the EC´s DG  ConnectJANUARY 2018  preparatory  meetings and  consultations  for developing  new research  activities and  further developing  competences in  AI within Public  Administration in  Portugal FEBRUARY 2018  Identification and  launching of four  pilot R&D projects to  foster AI within Public  Administration, in close  interaction between  FCT and AMA MARCH 2018 launching of “FCT´s Mobilising  programme to foster AI in the  public administration”, through a  competitive call for R&D projects  promoted by FCT; APRIL 2018 Portugal signs  the “European AI  declaration”, during  the second EU digital  Day, BrusselsOCTOBER 2018  presentation of 19 R&D  projects funded by FCT,  under the ”FCT´s Mobilising  programme to foster AI in  public administration” OCTOBER 2018  kick-off for a  specialised team  to prepare an AI  Portugal 2030 strategy  within the scope of   INCoDe.2030 4
NOVEMBER 2018 preparatory meetings  and consultations  for AI Portugal 2030  strategy DECEMBER 12TH, 2018 presentation and  public discussion  of a draft version  of AI Portugal 2030  strategy in the second  National Forum on  Digital Skills   - INCoDe.2030JANUARY – FEBRUARY 2019 consultations with different  entities and business  enterprises JANUARY 14TH, 2019 launch of a call within the System  to Support the Modernisation  and Capacitation of Public  Administration (SAMA2020)  to finance Data Science and  Artificial Intelligence projects  within Public AdministrationFEBRUARY 1ST, 2019 presentation and expert  discussion of the AI Portugal  2030 strategy at Carnegie  Mellon University, Pittsburg, in  the context of the Carnegie  Mellon-Portugal ProgrammeFEBRUARY 15TH, 2019  presentation and public  discussion of the AI Portugal  2030 strategy at FCUP,  Porto, with representatives  of research centres working  on AI MARCH 1ST, 2019 “FCT´s Mobilizing  programme to  foster AI in public  administration”,  through a  competitive call  for R&D projects  promoted by FCT   – second edition FEBRUARY 12TH, 2019 presentation and  public discussion of  the AI Portugal 2030  strategy at INL, Braga,  with EC´s Deputy DG  ConnectFEBRUARY 25TH, 2019  presentation and  public discussion of  the AI Portugal 2030  strategy in Porto,  together with the  presentation of OECD  2018 S&T Outlook 5
6 AI PORTUGAL 2030
7 AI PORTUGAL 2030Foreword     08 Manuel Heitor, Minister of Science, Technology and Higher Education    08 Alípio Jorge, Coordinator of the “AI Portugal 2030” National Strategy    10 Preamble      11 Introduction      14 What is AI?     16 Portugal in Technology and AI Now     17 The Portuguese AI ecosystem    18 A brief digital perspective of the Portuguese Education System    19 AI in the World      20 Vision      22 Detailed Vision     22 Objectives      24 Strategy      25 Actions      27 Areas of specialisation in Portugal with international impact     28 Areas for research and innovation in European and international networks    24 Public administration and its modernisation    32 Inclusion and Education: disseminating generalist knowledge on AI    34 New developments and supporting areas in European and international networks    35 Facing societal challenges brought by AI: Ethics and safety    35 This Document’s Life Cycle     35CONTENTS
8 AI PORTUGAL 2030 01 FOREWORD Manuel  Heitor Minister  of Science,  T echnology  and Higher  EducationThe goal of our “AI Portugal 2030”  strategy is to foster a collective process mobilising citizens at large and  key stake holders in particular, towards building-up a knowledge intensive labour-market with a strong  community of forefront companies  producing and exporting AI technologies supported by research and  innovation communities involved in  excellent high level research.  In the coming decade, AI technologies should be easily available to  promote the efficiency and quality  of all activities, including SMEs, public services, and every citizen. This  requires qualifying the labour force  and a guarantee that Portugal will  be at the forefront of AI Education  for all. AI will improve the quality of  services and the efficiency of processes while guarantying fairness,  wellbeing, and quality of life.AI technologies  should be easily  available to promote  the efficiency  and quality of all  activities, including  SMEs, public services  and every citizen.  This requires  qualifying the  labour force and  to guarantee that  Portugal will be in  the forefront of AI  Education for all 
9 AI PORTUGAL 2030This strategy is fully aligned with the  Coordinated Action plan of the EU  and their Member States and is included in INCoDe.2030, the Portuguese initiative to foster digital skills.  It considers and promotes a coordinated approach at a European level encouraging the use of this powerful technology to help solve the  world’s biggest challenges, from  health to climate, from transport to  agriculture, and from cybersecurity  to industry in general. The current text is the result of a  long dialogue over the last two  years and should continously evolve as a dynamic and collective effort  with annual reviews and a systematic process of mobilising citizens at  large, and key stake holders in particular. The main general objectives  include added economic growth, scientific excellence, and human development increasing dramatically the  qualifications of the labour force,  particularly its technological qualifications, while promoting inclusion  and awareness at all levels of education.  But it should be clear that the growing usage of AI must also strengthen societal robustness by building a ADDED ECONOMIC GROWTH,  SCIENTIFIC EXCELLENCE AND  HUMAN DEVELOPMENT clear vision of the impacts of AI in democracy, privacy, security, fairness,  the labour market, governmental  and commercial transparency,  and equity. Although AI is highly  disruptive in all these dimensions, it  also provides, when it is made ethical-by-design, a set of powerful tools  to actually improve society and democracy. 
10 AI PORTUGAL 2030Alípio  Jorge Coordinator  of the “AI  Portugal  2030” National  Strategy More than two thirds of a century  ago, Alan Turing, a European, published an article with the question  “Can Machines Think?” where he  proposed the “Imitation Game”, a test  that intended to determine whether or not an artificial agent could  be considered intelligent. The exact  term Artificial Intelligence (AI) would  appear in 1955 branded by McCarthy, Minsky, Rochester and Shannon,  four American pioneers in AI and  Computer Science. After that, the  area has developed worldwide to a  mature scientific field with important  applications in Robotics, Planning,  Expert Systems, Natural Language  and Game Playing. In Portugal, the  field started to grow in the 80s with a  few pioneers working in areas such  as Knowledge Representation, Logic Programming, Machine Learning,  Natural Language Processing and  Multi Agent Systems. By that time, we  had the first Portuguese Conference  on AI and the launching of the Portuguese AI Association. But until recently, the society and the media saw AI  mainly as a science fiction must.  Through the 90s, however, the scenario started to change rapidly due It is predicted  that AI  technologies  will have a  significant  impact in the  economic  growth of the  developed  countries and  of the world as  a whole in the  next decade to the growing flood of data coming from Enterprise Information Systems, the World Wide Web and the  enormous spread of sensors in our  cars, our phones, our gadgets, our  environments, and our homes. This  abundance of data combined with  the ever-growing computational  power and a strong business innovation landscape gave rise to new machine learning models, which during  this decade boosted the whole of AI  to a golden era. Other developments  and achievements in autonomous  vehicles, robotics, game playing and  natural language understanding  made the field emerge to a broad  public recognition. Artificial Intelligence has now reached the economy in the developed world and  beyond and is a main asset of big  and small technological companies. It is predicted that AI technologies will have a significant impact in  the economic growth of the developed countries and of the world as a  whole over the next decade. Europe  has pioneered and excelled in AI and  technological research, it has strong  worldwide players and it is definitely  well positioned to develop and adopt  AI. However, Europe also faces the  threat of increasingly depending on  technology that is not made here.  The US is leading in many AI domains; China dominates the microchip industry and is investing heavily  to become the AI world leader by  2030. Most importantly, the convenience of the widespread adoption of  AI cannot hinder the human-centred  European values. Privacy protection,  safety, transparency, fairness and  inclusion must be ensured in the European space. In 2018, the Member  States of the European Union agreed  on defining a Coordinated Action  Plan, which would help shape and  articulate the national strategies of  each country, promoting strong AI  research and innovation and incor-porating ethical principles by design.  Portugal, mainly through the Ministry  of Science, Technology, and Higher  Education led by Manuel Heitor, and  the Ministry of Economy led by Pedro  Siza Vieira, is actively involved in this  effort. It also naturally articulates with  the national programme for digital  skills, INCoDe.2030 coordinated by  Pedro Guedes de Oliveira. This document for the Portuguese AI strategy is  the result of the first round of discussions made by many representatives  from Research, Academia, Companies, and Public Administration. Just  as the new AI revolution is only beginning, this document is the starting  point of a strategy that aims to bring  together AI producers, researchers,  up-takers, consumers, policy makers  and the society as a whole in order to  push Europe and Portugal to a bright  future. I was the main editor and this  would not have been possible without the contributions of many who  suggested, rewrote, reviewed, inserted, underlined and criticised parts of  it. To all these contributors my personal acknowledgement.
11 AI PORTUGAL 2030 AI SPECIALISTS TECHNICALLY QUALIFIELD WORK FORCEYO UNG POPULATION POPULATION IN GENERALINCoDe.2030 ACTION LINESMAIN ACTORS RESEARCH QUALIFICA TIONR&D CENTRES AND UNIVERSITIES HIGHER EDUCA TION IEFP* IAPMEI** INA***  MINISTRY OF EDUCA TION  AND OTHER PLAYERS CCDI* AND MUNICIPALITIESEDUCA TION INCLUSIONSPECIALISA TION02 PREAMBLE AI and INCoDe.2030 Following in the footsteps of mass  digitisation, which has already been  changing world economy and societal fabric, AI will accelerate and  amplify the process. To think ahead  and prepare action plans in digital matters is important not only to  properly handle the pitfalls but also  to take advantage of the emerging opportunities. The impact on people´s life and the challenging pace  of change of technology enhance  the importance of an AI National  Strategy that builds on the analysis  of its developments and applications  to focus on domain specific questions such as the AI preparedness  of Portuguese economic, social, and cultural landscape, the role of  government, and how to involve the  research community in the entire  process. However, the setting upon  which the so-called AI revolution will  unravel is far larger than an AI Strategy can handle, so INCoDe.2030, in all  its five action lines, has to prepare the  ground for its sound implementation.
12 AI PORTUGAL 2030Inclusion Digital inclusion aims at providing  the vast majority of Portuguese  population with minimum knowledge and skills that will allow for  them to use the tools available in  their current life to understand the  potential benefits that new digital  and frequently AI based solutions  can bring to their lives, but also to  understand the risks and threats  they have to face, from being  screened and targeted with false  information to being driven to options that are not necessarily in  their benefit. Moreover, safety and  privacy are critical issues where an  acute sense of risk and responsibility should be achieved. “Creative Communities for Digital  Inclusion” (CCDIs) that, under INCoDe.2030, are being developed  around the country and in close  cooperation with municipalities  and other local organisations to  help vulnerable and digital excluded communities develop the necessary competences and understand the living context induced  by the Digital Transformation and  particularly AI. For some communities, due to deeper factors of exclusion ranging from age and lack  of qualifications to ethnical or other  issues, digital autonomy is hard to  achieve and can only be reached  by tailored and networked solutions  attaining at each cultural environment counting on mentors and assistants who have to be trained to  help and assist on a daily basis. Education It is very important to contemplate  an education strategy with an early introduction of the fundamental  concepts of Computer Science  complemented by Information and  Communication Technology (ICT) learning through its integration in the curriculum of other disciplines. Moreover, given its importance, concepts of AI should also be considered at an  early stage of schooling. This could be done through examples like i) teaching young students the fundamentals of machine learning using  Ciência Viva Clubs  located in schools and Science Clubs – already present  in many places –, taking as examples of challenges current global problems from biodiversity or pollution studies; i) developing creative / collaborative multimedia contents in science, be it  on key Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) subjects  like human biology and the energy ecosystem, or on Portuguese regions,  geography, and history, and many other subjects. i) developing programming capabilities and leveraging on the high expressiveness of programming languages and platforms to create original and  creative contents. In this process, students will be able to not only learn how to reason and  solve problems digitally, but also to create and define new ones drawing on  their creative capability and critical thinking. Moreover, young students should understand the risks and threats that  they face in the same way as the rest of the community aggravated with  the fact that they spend most of their time immersed in cyberspace with  the false feeling that since they are “digital natives”, so at ease with technology and devices, their – frail and superficial - expertise protects them from  hazards and attacks. FOR SOME COMMUNITIES, DUE TO DEEPER EXCLUSION FACTORS  RANGING FROM AGE AND LACK OF QUALIFICA TIONS TO ETHNICAL  ISSUES OR OTHER, DIGIT AL AUTONOMY IS HARD TO ACHIEVE AND  CAN ONL Y BE REACHED BY T AILORED AND NETWORKED SOLUTIONS
13 AI PORTUGAL 2030PORTUGUESE HIGHER EDUCA TION  SYSTEM HAS BEEN PREPARING  HIGHL Y SKILLED PROFESSIONALS  IN COMPUTER SCIENCE AND  ENGINEERING, AS WELL AS IN  STRONGL Y RELA TED FIELDS LIKE  ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC  ENGINEERING, COMMUNICA TIONS,  MA THEMA TICS AND PHYSICSQualification AI brings enormous potential for productivity growth from agriculture to  high-technology services, but it requires a qualified workforce trained to  identify the best AI opportunities, develop engineering solutions, adapt current working environments, and deploy AI applications following safe and  ethical standards. To this extent, a proper qualification of the workforce in  ICT in general, and in AI in particular, is fundamental to enable Portuguese  economic development and sustainability. Over the last couple of years,  Portugal has become a very attractive place for international high-tech  companies because of its secure and friendly social fabric as well as the  technical quality of its workers. Moreover, it has become a fertile environment for start-ups that have taken an international stand and in various  cases become first class players. But success has also shown the shortage  of a qualified workforce and a very strong effort has to be made to overcome this problem. The actions to tackle this challenge must take place at various stages:  i) to extend the professional training of unemployed and active workers  in ICT and AI, to allow them to be active agents in the application and  support of AI in various industrial and service sectors. For this purpose,  private companies or enterprise associations and public institutions  like IAPMEI1 and IEFP2 must play an important role;  i) to improve the quality of public services through a better qualified  public administration, the responsibility of which relies heavily on INA3; i) to re-skill professionals from less employable sectors and up-skill programmers and engineers through advanced training programmes  in AI and through a strong involvement of Polytechnic Institutes and  Universities.   Specialisation The Portuguese higher education system has been preparing highly skilled  professionals in computer science and engineering, as well as in highly  related fields like electrical and electronic engineering, communications,  mathematics and physics. The intake of STEM students in Portuguese universities and polytechnic institutes is higher than the EU average. Moreover,  more than half of these students pursue their studies to an MSc degree and  the number of PhD programmes and students in areas related to AI and  data science have steadily increased over the past decade.  At the same time, the Lisbon Machine Learning School, an international  summer course, is almost at its 9th edition while in Porto a similar organisation  on The Future of Computation will be in its 2nd edition this year, both of which  aim at researchers and graduate students, computer scientists and industry  practitioners who desire a more in-depth understanding of these subjects. The interest in AI, data science and their application and implementation  in various domains has been growing among students and academic and  research staff, and the transfer of technology and solutions to industry and  services is creating a bridge over the so-called “death valley”. 1  IAPMEI – Portuguese Institute for Support to SMEs 2  IEFP – Portuguese Institute for Employment and Professional Training 3  INA – Portuguese Institute for Public AdministrationResearch Research on AI, which holds a long  tradition in Portuguese academia, should also be intensified as an  ample domain per se. Today’s  challenges are very diversified and  complex, such as for example:  i) improving learning methodologies like learning with small data  sets and through the generalisation of outliers; ii) understanding context connecting each statement with  everything that came before; iii) understanding causality and,  being able to differentiate correlation and causality; iv) … But also considering ethics, one of  the most challenging aspects in AI  today, and building trust through  data curation in order to avoid biases assuring transparency in the way  judgements are made promoting  accountability and explainability. AI research also induces the development of neighbouring areas  like advanced computing and the  emergence of new areas like quantum or neuromorphic computing,  and everything that deals with the  blend of digital and the physical  world. New services and industrial  processes will emerge and they will  certainly have a role in sustainability.
14 AI PORTUGAL 2030The global  outlook is that  AI will become  increasingly  important for  economic growth  and development  at least during the  next five to ten  years 03 INTRODUCTION Artificial Intelligence is already a  powerful and transformative technology driving all sorts of changes  and with a wide-ranging effect in  different domains from health to  education, from work and organisational cultures to the environment. The global outlook is that AI  will become increasingly important  for economic growth and development at least during the next five to  ten years. Its promises and potential  may be harnessed for the social  common good and for all4, but it  may also unleash complex risks to  society. Portugal has an active and  rapidly growing AI ecosystem, including academia, industry and the  public sector, and must act to fully  benefit from this revolution. In order   to be prepared for it, Portugal must  foster a strong investment in AI at  national and European terms, mobilise key actors, identify key areas  4  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, The European Council,  the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions  – Artificial Intelligence for Europe - COM(2018) 237 final, 25.04.2018.for development and mitigate risks  for the citizens and society.  The aim of this document is to set  the basis of a national strategy for  the development of the Portuguese  economy and society through the  use of Artificial Intelligence in public and private activities and the  consolidation of fundamental and  applied research on AI. This strategy is fully aligned with the Coordinated Action Plan of the EU and its  Member States and it is included in  INCoDe.2030, the Portuguese initiative to foster digital skills.  In 2018, Europe made a strong  commitment to strengthen European Research, Development and  Innovation (R&D&I) in AI in order to  face an accelerated competition in  the global market. With this in mind,  the development of a Coordinated  Action Plan on Artificial Intelligence  in Europe has been launched in 
15 AI PORTUGAL 2030PORTUGAL MUST FOSTER STRONG INVESTMENT IN AI A T  NA TIONAL AND EUROPEAN TERMS, MOBILIZE KEY ACTORS,  IDENTIFY KEY AREAS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND MITIGA TE RISKS  FOR THE CITIZENS AND THE SOCIETY It is essential to  scale up public and  private investments  and to mobilise all  actors concerned  around common  strategic interests,  from research  and innovation,  to bringing stateof-the art AI  applications into  the market so  that the economy  and the public  sector uptake  the foreseeable  benefits of AIApril 2018 and formally accepted by the Council in December 20185. Recognising that AI is transforming our world and present challenges and opportunities that need to be faced with ambition and by joining forces, the  Action Plan calls for a coordinated approach at European level encouraging the use of this powerful technology to help solve the world’s biggest  challenges, from health to climate, from transport to agriculture, and from  cybersecurity to industry in general. Portugal has joined these efforts from the first preparatory meetings so that  Europe is at the forefront in investing and developing AI and in exploring  the opportunities offered by AI. It is essential to scale up public and private  investments and to mobilise all actors concerned around common strategic interests, from research and innovation to bringing state-of-the-art  AI applications into the market so that the economy and the public sector  uptake the foreseeable benefits of AI. In line with the Declaration signed by  the EU Member States in April 20186, Portugal wants to rise to the expectation of this ambitious European approach.   AI needs an interdisciplinary and collaborative approach. The opacity often  seen around the implications of AI may be an obstacle for the wider society  to make sense of it and take part in the dialogue. AI needs to integrate cognitive diversity to foster social inclusion and transformation. Therefore, we  need a diversity of specialists that will foster different perspectives to better  solve complex problems. But we also need the whole population to take  part in the debate and to get involved in designing AI by voicing priorities  of what AI should address in a human-centred approach. Championing  diversity, a source of innovation, in AI brings together different forms of collective and distributed intelligence to solve problems7. The value of AI also  relies on its ability to become democratically distributed. In order to achieve  this, we need to invest in the creation of mechanisms to store, make available and distribute data  as well as in the development of digital education  and skills to citizens. We know that AI will have, and is already having, a strong positive impact  on Portugal and Europe. Albeit this technology becoming a driver for economic growth and, transforming the labour market, industry, and society  as a whole, we also know that it carries risks  that have to be identified and  5  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, The European Council,  the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions  – Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence - COM(2018) 795 final, 7.12.2018. 6  European Commission: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/eu-memberstates-sign-cooperate-artificial-intelligence 7  Levy, P. (1997) Collective Intelligence: mankind’s emerging world in cyberspace. Cambridge,  UK: Perseus.mitigated so that the opportunities  it brings can be fully reaped. With  this in mind, Portugal’s AI Strategy  will be based on the fundamental principle of not compromising  the dignity of citizens, strongly anchored by the promotion of wellbeing, fairness and quality of life. Portugal is already active in many  research, innovation and deployment projects in the field of AI  particularly in regard to machine  learning, multi-agent systems, big  data, remote sensing, robotics, advanced analytics, augmented reality, intelligent systems, monitoring,  simulation, and maintenance to  name a few applied to automated  manufacturing, autonomous vehicles, anomaly and fraud detection, 
16 AI PORTUGAL 2030WE NEED A DIVERSITY OF SPECIALISTS THA T WILL FOSTER  DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES TO BETTER SOL VE COMPLEX  PROBLEMS. BUT WE ALSO NEED THE WHOLE POPULA TION  TO T AKE PART IN THE DEBA TE AND TO GET INVOL VED IN  DESIGNING AI BY VOICING PRIORITIES OF WHA T AI SHOULD  ADDRESS, IN A HUMAN-CENTRIC APPROACH Acknowledging  that people are the  central element  of research,  innovation,  deployment and  usage of any AI  manifestation, the  outlined AI strategy  deliberately puts at  its core action plan  the empowering  of people with  the necessary  knowledge, skills  and means to thrive  in an AI enabled  worldenergy efficiency, critical infrastructures management, precision agriculture, oceans, transport, mobility,  environment, and health.  Ultimately, we want to foster the  impact of AI  on transport, agriculture, energy and sustainable energy systems, aeronautics and space,  security and industry in general.  Other areas of the utmost importance are the blue economy, urban  development and mobility, Earth  Observation and biodiversity. In industry , AI will completely  change the paradigm of human  machine interface and the decision  processes based on several developments, including robots, to adapt  to new working environments with  little to none reprogramming needed and systems with real time control capabilities. Acknowledging that people are the  central element of research, innovation, deployment and usage of  any AI manifestation, the outlined  AI strategy deliberately puts at the  core of its action plan the empowering of people with the necessary  knowledge, skills and means to  thrive in an AI enabled world.   What is AI? Artificial Intelligence is a broad term  with a large number of formal and  informal definitions. For the scope of  this initiative we refer to AI as the scientific area and the suite of technologies that use programs and physical devices to mimic advanced  facets of human intelligence. AI artefacts can display abilities such as (but not necessarily limited to): autonomy, problem solving, complex  planning, negotiation, reasoning,  inference, decision making, diagnosis, prediction, monitoring, learning  from experience, adaptation to new  situations, language understanding  and generation, explanation, argumentation, visual/audio recognition,  object recognition and the generation of complex artefacts. For this  strategy, we will focus on emerging  AI technologies. 
17 AI PORTUGAL 2030 04 Portugal is showing good results in  some innovation indicators (including but not limited to AI), although in  many of them we have been typically placed below the average of  the European Union8. Portuguese  institutions are particularly well positioned in terms of international research collaborations, broadband  penetration and product/process innovations in Small and Medium-size  Enterprises (SME). Portugal has been  relatively successful as an innovation-friendly environment and has  an attractive research system.   Human Resources:  Numbers  from 2017 show that Portugal has  a shortage of qualified human re8  “European Innovation Scoreboard 2018” and “Country Report Portugal 2018  Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances”, COMMISSION ST AFF WORKING DOCUMENT   9  Digital economy and digital society statistics at regional level, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/sources in advanced technological  areas, mostly in terms of higher education (67% of the EU average in  2017) but also in lifelong learning  (88.8%) and new PhDs (94%). Employment in knowledge intensive  activities is low (57% of EU) but it is  slightly above average in fast-growing enterprises (103.2%). Research: Portuguese research has  a high level of international collaboration (185% of the EU average in 2017)  participating in the 10% most cited  works (82.6%) and in the attraction of  foreign PhD students (98.3%).  Innovation: The slice of employment of fast-growing companies  in the most innovative sectors has been improving. The R&D expenditure of the business sector has  considerably improved since 2015  and represents about 52% of gross  expenditure in R&D. SMEs are doing quite well in innovations in the  product or the process (158.8%)  and in marketing/organisation levels (112%).  Infrastructure:  The best indicator  of Portugal in the 2018 European Innovation Scoreboard is broadband  penetration (200%). Despite us having a low level of Internet usage (below 60% of the households in 2017)9  including e-commerce and internet  banking with a better performance  in the use of social networks.PORTUGAL  IN TECHNOLOGY  AND AI NOW
18 AI PORTUGAL 2030PORTUGUESE  RESEARCH HAS  A HIGH LEVEL OF  INTERNA TIONAL  COLLABORA TION The Portuguese AI ecosystem Portuguese universities and polytechnic institutes offer a broad range of  first, second and third cycle degrees in Information Technology. The offer  of MSc and PhD degrees in AI related topics is also noteworthy and growing  steadily. However, companies in Portugal report a lack of human resources  in these areas. The offer in post-graduate conversion courses and focused  specialisations is limited but growing, most of which are carried out in cooperation with companies.  Academia hosts a good number of research centres that have been devoted to AI (including robotics) for some decades. Scientific societies have  been active in the promotion of AI as a scientific and technological field.  The Portuguese AI Society (APPIA), Robotics Society (SPR) and Pattern  Recognition Society (APRP) are the most established in the field. Fundamental and applied research on AI has been conducted in Portugal since  at least 1980 and the Portuguese AI community has since built a solid  world reputation both through researchers working in Portugal as well as  Portuguese doing AI research abroad. In terms of activity, Portugal ranks  21st in the world of all-time AI related scientific publications per capita10. The increased number of new technological companies involved with AI  has been impressive. Y oung scale-ups and delegations of European multinationals have become important in hiring (hundreds of IT and AI specialists) and development (innovation, collaboration with universities, and  knowledge-intensive exports). However, a 2018 study conducted by Microsoft11 reports that only 4% of the universe of 277 relevant companies  consulted consider themselves to be in a mature stage of AI usage, 61%  are still planning or in the pilot stage, and 57% of the companies expect AI  to have a high impact on new business areas. Collaboration between companies and academia is becoming increasingly  common, both in terms of collaborative R&D as well as in the recruitment  flow. However, top companies working in Portugal on AI recognise that they  have to improve their competence in forging partnerships with Academia. The Portuguese Public Sector (PPS) comprehends a very large number of entities. In 2018, the scientific funding agency (FCT) supported 19 new projects  between research units and PPS entities focused on the application of AI to improve public administration. Other initiatives along the same line are prepared  for 2019 with a tendency to increase the innovation indicators within the PPS. Collaborative Laboratories (CoLABs) are a new form of partnership between industry and society for market-driven innovation and skilled job creation. CoLABs’ main goals are to create qualified and scientific employment  in Portugal through the implementation of R&I agendas oriented towards  the creation of economic and social value eliminating the gap between research and innovation activities; reinforcing the collaboration between different institutions (public and private) in co-responsibility of knowledge-based  strategies; combining public based, competitive, and private funding. There  are currently 21 CoLABs12, some of which have activities related with AI.  10  Source: www.scopus.com. 11  Artificial Intelligence in Europe: Portugal, Outlook for 2019 and Beyond. Report by Microsoft 12  https://www.fct.pt/apoios/CoLAB/docs/lista_homologada_titulo_de_colab_lote2.pdf  https://www.fct.pt/apoios/CoLAB/docs/Lista_homologada_titulo_de_CoLAB.pdfThese joint ventures gather academia, companies and other important stakeholders. Portugal has three Digital Innovation  Hubs (DIHs) already established  and aims to enlarge the network  of DIHs. These one-stop-shops  help companies to become more  competitive with regard to their  business/production processes,  products, and services using digital  technologies, including AI. DIH are  one of the most important pillars of  the Digitise European Industry effort  as they are composed of the most  relevant business groups in the respective areas as well as start-ups,  SMEs and academia in order to ensure the broad dissemination and  transfer of know-how by and to the  business community. The three DIH  are Produtech (production technologies), iMan Norte Hub (manufacturing) and HUB4AGRi (agriculture).
19 AI PORTUGAL 2030The R&D  expenditure of  the business  sector has  considerably  improved since  2015A brief digital perspective  of the Portuguese  Education System  Portugal has been following an  ICT strategy in education similar to  some Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development  (OECD) countries with a strong investment in technology and its use.  The 2015 OECD report on “Students, Computers, and Learning:  Making the Connection” indicates  that boys are significantly more likely than girls to start using computers  early. Surprisingly, the report also  observes that access to computers  in schools is not a predictor of student performance. In fact, students  who use computers very frequently at school do a lot worse in most  learning outcomes, even when  social background and student  demographics is considered. The  study results also show that strong  investments in ICT for education  produced no significant improvements in student achievement in  reading, mathematics, or science.  Inversely, students with a baseline  level of proficiency in reading and  mathematics perform better in digital competences. This context must  also take into consideration the fast  pace of technology change, which  deprecates technology usage at  the same rate and increases the  risk of future adults being left with  very little useful knowledge after  several years of education. According to the same OECD report, Portugal is still below average  in many relevant Digital Education  indicators for the preparation of  youngsters for an AI world, namely  the number of students who reported the use of computers in Maths  lessons; differences in early exposure to computers and the Internet  between boys and girls; the success  rate on tasks that require the use of THE INTRODUCTION  OF COMPUTER  SCIENCE CONTENTS  SUPPORTING  AI, POSSIBL Y  ARTICULA TED WITH  OTHER DISCIPLINES,  SHOULD BE WELL  RECEIVED BY  STUDENTS computers to solve problems; performance in digital reading; and the  index of ICT use at school.  However, it is noteworthy that Portugal is among the best OECD  countries in the use of ICT outside of  school for schoolwork while lagging  behind OECD average in the use of  ICT at school, which seems to support that Portuguese students are  aware of the importance of ICT in  education and use it as a common  tool for study. This also suggests  that the introduction of Computer Science contents supporting AI,  possibly articulated with other disciplines, should be well received by  students.
20 AI PORTUGAL 203005 AI IN THE  WORLD AI in the world The year 2018 was the year AI reappeared as a practical and powerful technology with the ability to  bring a significant added growth  to the world economy in a short to  medium term. The burst of comprehensive information systems in  companies in the turn of the 90s,  the almost simultaneous tremendous growth of the World Wide  Web and the ubiquitous dissemination of sensors made available a  huge quantity and variety of data  that potentially enabled the automation of many decisions in line  with the widening of the importance of robotics and automation. THE EUROPEAN UNION  SIGNED IN APRIL 2018  A DECLARA TION OF  COOPERA TION AND  ANNOUNCED THE  COMMUNICA TION OF  “ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR EUROPE” The exponentially increasing computing power and storage capacity  made a small but visible fraction of  this endeavour possible. The United  States has been one of the main  leaders of this revolution through  their technological giants and top  universities. US companies gather  data from all over the world and dominate electronic commerce  and commodity web services. China launches their own AI strategy  with the aim of being in line with the  world by 2020 and to lead in some  AI areas in 2025. They are highly investing in the development of skills,  which is a major weakness for the  Chinese ecosystem, research and  industrialisation. Chinese protective  information regulation provided the  opportunity for their own tech giants to rise. Canada has been investing hugely in the research and  development of skills fostering innovation through university-industry  collaborations and attracting the  offices of US tech companies. Canada is also home to some of the  
21 AI PORTUGAL 2030 founders of deep learning, possibly the AI technology that mostly boosted  the ongoing AI revolution. These researchers have recently won the prestigious Turing Award on account of their scientific contributions. France plans  to invest 1.5 billion Euros on strengthening the AI ecosystem and developing  an open data policy. Germany has been home to the Industry 4.0 which  acknowledges the power of the digital and AI in the development of industry and economy. Finland’s strategy stresses the importance of digital skills  and human capital for innovation and societal development. Meanwhile,  many other nations in the world have announced their own view of the  roads to be taken in this AI revolution. The European Union signed in April 2018 a declaration of cooperation and  announced the communication of “Artificial Intelligence for Europe”. The  High-Level Expert Group was nominated shortly after that. The Group on  “Digitising European Industry and AI” with representatives from all Member  States and propelled by DG-Connect promoted several meetings and produced a “Coordinated Action Plan” in December 2018. The strategies of the  Member States should be defined by mid-2019.The burst of  comprehensive  information  systems in  companies in  the turn of the  90’s, the almost  simultaneous  tremendous  growth of the  World Wide  Web and the  ubiquitous  dissemination of  sensors made  available a huge  quantity and  variety of data  that potentially  enabled the  automation of  many decisions  in line with the  widening of  the importance  of robotics and  automation
22 AI PORTUGAL 2030 06 VISION   By 2030, Portugal will have a knowledge intensive labour market with  a strong community of forefront  companies producing and exporting AI technologies supported by  an academia involved in high-level,  fundamental and applied research.  AI technologies will be easily available to promote the efficiency and  quality of all activities, including  SMEs, public services and every citizen. The labour force will be highly qualified and Portugal will be at  the forefront of AI Education for all.  AI will improve the quality of services and the efficiency of processes  while guarantying fairness, wellbeing and quality of life.Detailed Vision Promoting a better society: AI will improve the quality of services and efficiency of processes while guarantying human dignity as well as wellbeing and quality of life. The economy will grow at a faster pace due to the  adoption of AI. Important societal problems such as sustainability, resource  management, and unemployment will be successfully handled using AI  and data science technologies. Strong ethical guidelines will protect the  fundamental rights of citizens and our core values. Fostering AI skills and “digital minds” for all: Portugal will be at the forefront of  AI Education with every student prepared with Computer Science knowledge capable of leveraging AI general skills as well as promoting specialists  and attracting AI talent from Portugal and abroad. The Computer Science  based strategy of AI skills and related skills will spread to earlier stages of  education and to lifelong learning. Promoting new jobs and developing an economy of AI services: All companies and public services will consume AI. A supply chain of AI services will  bring AI from the research labs to society. Services will be accessible to 
23 AI PORTUGAL 2030 The growing  application of AI  by Portuguese  companies will  motivate the  development  of innovative  algorithms and  methodologies,  and the Portuguese  AI community will  participate in the  development of  future AISMEs through the adoption of AI as  a service (AI-on-demand). Specialised companies will be able to  develop and adapt AI algorithms  and put them in the national and  international markets. A data market and a model market will flourish  together with other AI-related direct and indirect markets. Portugal  will adopt AI technologies at a fast  pace modernising industry and the  public sector and competing in the  global market.  Fostering Portugal as a living lab for  the experimentation of new developments: Portuguese innovative sectors will be promoted as “living labs”  for new experimentation at a global level, including in: i) AI for urban  transformation through sustainable  cities; ii) AI for sustainable energy  networks; iii) AI for biodiversity, from  forests and green economy to marine species and blue economy; iv)  AI for autonomous driving; v) AI for  cybersecurity; and vi) Quantum  materials for AI; vii) adaptive learning curricula for students. Securing AI niche markets through  key specialised services in Portugal:  areas of specialisation will be further developed, namely: i) Natural  Language Processing with application in automatic translation and  other automatable services; ii) Real  time AI with application in secure  business and financial transactions;  iii) AI for software development; iv)  AI for edge-computing. Contributing to new knowledge and  developments through AI research  and innovation: AI knowledge will  keep evolving rapidly over the next  decade. The research community will strengthen their presence in  the world through the development  of edge-cutting research in cooperation with the best international  research teams. The growing application of AI by Portuguese companies will motivate the development of innovative algorithms and methodologies, and the Portuguese AI  community will participate in the  development of future AI. Provide better public services for  citizens and businesses, and adopt  evidence-based approaches on  public policies and decision-making  processes: AI and data science will  become an important tool to pursue the vision laid out in the 2020  ICT Strategy changing from a reactive paradigm to an anticipatory service provision paradigm. At  the same time, public policies and  decision-making processes will be  increasingly supported by evidence  and not by intuition making use of  the vast amount of administrative  data already collected for operational purposes.AI WILL IMPROVE  THE QUALITY OF  SERVICES AND THE  EFFICIENCY OF  PROCESSES, WHILE  GUARANTYING THE  HUMAN DIGNITY AS  WELL AS WELLBEING  AND QUALITY OF LIFE
24 AI PORTUGAL 2030The growing application of AI must  also strengthen societal robustness, by  building a clear vision of the impacts of AI  in democracy, privacy, security, fairness,  the labour market, governmental and  commercial transparency and equityOur main general objectives to  reach by 2030 are the following. > Added Economic Growth: the added value brought by AI technologies  to the economic growth should be  significant. > Scientific Excellence: improve the  front-line position in fundamental and applied AI research of the  Portuguese Academia (universities,  polytechnic schools and research  institutions) measured in terms of  publication impact, international  leaderships, and international collaborations.  > Human Development: Increase dramatically the qualifications of the  labour force, in particular the technological qualifications, while promoting inclusion and awareness at  all levels of education.  In the process we expect to observe a significant increase in the  number and volume of knowledge-intensive AI companies displaying a  considerable R&D effort and increased collaboration between academia and companies/public sector. The awareness of AI capabilities and how it can be used to boost business  and overall quality of services should spread to the whole of society including  SMEs, and the public sector, as well as to citizens in their everyday life. The growing application of AI must also strengthen societal robustness by  building a clear vision of the impacts of AI on democracy, privacy, security,  fairness, the labour market, governmental and commercial transparency  and equity. Although AI is highly disruptive in all these dimensions it also  provides, if made ethical-by-design, a set of powerful tools to actually improve society and democracy. 07 OBJECTIVES
25 AI PORTUGAL 2030The  attractiveness  of Portugal  for knowledge  intensive young  companies and  international  production  units is high and  has conditions  to improve 08  STRA TEGY The strategy will revolve around four  main interacting processes. > The attractiveness of Portugal  for knowledge intensive young  companies and international production units is high and has the  conditions for improvement. These  units work in different sectors but  have the need for development of  specialised AI software and hightech devices for export in common.  The collaboration with academia is  growing in two axes: joint research  uptake (joint projects and CoLabs)  and the qualification pipeline. > The development of this ecosystem will motivate the increase of the  currently developing innovation levels for a vast number of companies  and organisations, including startups, SMEs, and the Government  Sector through business networking  and by benefiting from the maturing collaboration platforms with  academia. These include AI-ondemand pipelines and Digital Innovation Hubs. Expected outcomes  include an increase in the number of patents and the multiplication of  innovation-based businesses. > The research potential in AI and  other areas will grow due to the  larger share of private investment  and because of the added value  induced by the challenges brought  by innovating companies. Moreover,  researchers will gain insight into the  future of AI itself as a fundamental  scientific field. Expected outcomes  are a higher attraction of research  talent (and as a consequence of  professional talent), a higher impact  of scientific publications and an increased ability to join international  research networks of excellence.  These scientific results will in turn revert back to the productive sectors. > Academia alone and in collaboration with the Industry will increase  its capacity and develop diferent  levels of qualification programmes  in AI and related areas. Other educational institutions working at  different education levels will also  be motivated to invest in skilling,  reskilling and lifelong learning aim-
26 AI PORTUGAL 2030The  development of  this ecosystem  will motivate  the increase of  the currently  developing  innovation  levels for a  vast number of  companies and  organizations ACADEMIA ALONE AND  IN COLLABORA TION  WITH INDUSTRY WILL  INCREASE ITS CAPACITY  AND DEVELOP  QUALIFICA TION  PROGRAMS OF  DIFFERENT LEVELS IN AI  AND RELA TED AREASing at tailored qualifications. As an  outcome, Portugal will increase the  qualification levels of its professionals and increase the level of knowledge-intensive employment. Each of these four processes will be  accelerated through the following  instruments.  > Innovation funding programmes  for forefront AI-driven companies  and for joint uptakes with the research community;  > Creation of national and international sandboxes and testing facilities for the development of cutting-edge technologies; > Early development of knowledge-transfer platforms (Digital  Innovation Hubs) that will gradually be self-sustained as well as the  consolidation of an infrastructural  initiative towards full digitalisation of  the activities;  > Refinement of the innovation  voucher instrument; > Support for application based and  fundamental research that will be  multiplied by private funding; > Support and improvement of  working conditions for the development of qualification programmes; > Creation of qualification vouchers;  > Attraction and retention of talent  through internationalisation campaigns. At the same time, it is of the utmost  importance to ensure our core values and understand the impacts of  AI.  > Define regulatory frameworks  (also through the creation of regulatory sandboxes); > Define and deploy guidelines for  ethical-by-design AI through an  ethical committee for AI and Automation; > Spread awareness on AI and  technology in the entire population  to promote inclusion; > Study the impacts of AI on society  (i.e. employment, democracy,  and fairness) through focused  observations and by promoting  research in the respective scientific  areas. 
27 AI PORTUGAL 2030 Areas of specialisation  in Portugal with  international impact Portugal currently has strong players in some areas that may serve  as inspiring examples and help  drive innovation and research. The  following list identifies some of these  areas where Portugal will make a  specific effort to lead in Europe.  ACTIONS09 Natural Language Processing Portugal has developed an active research community in the area of computational linguistics / natural language processing as well as successful  companies (i.e. Unbabel and Priberam among others). Independent language resources that can be used by the diversity of European and world  languages and Portuguese in particular should be further promoted. Textual data is ubiquitous and improving its processing will have a significant  impact on all domains of application. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > Affirm international leadership in a few key areas, as listed below, by means of joint actions of companies  and academia leading to innovation, edge-cutting research and involvement in international networks. > Increase the impact of these areas in the Portuguese economy. > Identify other emerging research/innovation lines of AI and related technologies. SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Foster access to new and sophisticated markets worldwide; > Enable data and technology sharing for promoting research development and collaboration between  academia and companies. > Enable platforms for companies and academia to share best practices. > Promote the availability of an adequate computing infrastructure.
28 AI PORTUGAL 2030 Real Time decision making with AI  In many applications, AI algorithms need to respond in real time and autonomously and be able to absorb new data and adjust learned models.  Data comes in volume and velocity from trading or business transactions,  from sensors in automobiles or in industrial pipelines, from electrical and  telecommunications networks, from interactions with the environment,  from smart city installations, from robots moving in challenging environments, from cybersecurity installations, and from highly intensive games  or simulation interactions. Data has to be processed fast, models have to  adapt fast, and algorithms have to decide promptly and accurately. Portugal has a strong research community in data stream learning and many  companies have expertise in dealing with this kind of scenario. AI for Software Development The effort of software development can be aided by AI. The abstraction  level of programming can be increased through AI in specific domains  making coding easier and accessible to a wider audience. Development  can be faster and automated improving the entire software production lifecycle and reducing maintenance costs. This can also be central for the  dissemination of specific domain skills in software development. This is an  area where Portugal is already well equipped with a strong offer in rapid  software development processes and platforms, which must continue to  improve and innovate through AI. AI for Edge-computing Portugal can play an important role  in the area of Internet of Things (IoT)  and edge-computing. Industrial  units produce hardware devices for  different industries such as automotive, agricultural, and industrial machines and environments (i.e. for cities, factories, autonomous vehicles,  and including current major firms). Areas for research and  innovation in European  and international  networks In the area of AI there is relevant investment of European companies  in Portugal in several domains, such  as automotive, car multimedia and  intermodal transports; information  systems; components and services  for 5G networks; smart cities and  security; banking; and bioeconomy  and biorefineries. Some outstanding examples with companies, researchers and joint ventures already  in action are referred hereafter.   The effort  of software  development  can itself be  aided by AI.  The abstraction  level of  programming  can be  increased  through AI  in specific  domains,  making coding  easier and  accessible to a  wider audience
29 AI PORTUGAL 2030AI and urban transformation  through sustainable Cities Smart cities will rely more and more  on AI. Be it in the use of big data,  software application in all aspects  of life in the city (i.e. traffic control  and public safety), or energy efficiency and autonomous vehicles  and logistics, the city will embed  AI in order to optimise and adapt  these technologies to the inherent  rapid changing environment in a  complex ecosystem that is a city. The development of smart cities SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > Make AI research have an economic and social impact on all the referred areas with emphasis on the  subjects mentioned below. > Have a strong research driven ecosystem of companies, academia, public sector and society including  start-ups, scale-ups, and established companies. > Guarantee that AI is safely and ethically applied to the various domains. > Help companies and regulators find appropriate legal frameworks. > Identify strategic lines of research that can foster the long-term future of AI. SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Identify KPI for AI investment evaluation in Portugal. > Set up DIHs focusing on AI, working in close collaboration or integrated with the existing sectorial DIH already in the field and with European DIH (for example the DIH on cybersecurity at Leon or the DIH on IoT in  Salamanca). > Set up one or more AI-on-demand platforms linked to other similar efforts in Europe to be made available  through DIH. > Promote innovation vouchers and those that facilitate industry-academia cooperation. > Further promote the participation in the European effort for developing regulation and protocols for an  Ethical and Secure AI. > Develop regulatory sandboxes articulated with the EU. > Foster the collaboration between companies in Portugal and European industrial giants through participation in European Networks. > Integrate a strategy of closer cooperation between European AI excellence centres around agendas fixed  together with industry and based on common knowledge and common challenges for the deployment of  AI-based solutions in the areas where Europe faces major challenges; > Engage with international partners in order to align positions and benefit from international cooperation  in AI, including with Africa, in a variety of areas not forgetting subjects such as standards, ethics and cybersecurity. Informed and concerted actions in AI are required and international cooperation is essential in all  activities for a responsible and concerted development of AI. > Reinforce the national structure for funding management. relies on research, on education  and skills, on innovation, and on the  market uptake of new technologies. AI is fundamental for urban  transformation and many leading  projects in Portugal are already  pursuing these challenges from car  multimedia to cyber security.   AI and sustainable energy  systems Current debates and trends in energy, both within Portugal and the  EU, highlight some significant en-ergy system challenges. The first  of these is the need to reverse the  energy consumption and emission  trends most nations have seen over  the past 15 years. Meeting greenhouse gas emission targets is a  challenge that calls for new ideas,  tools, technologies, and policies. It is essential to devise strategies  for meeting these challenges in  a cost-effectively manner requiring intelligent energy management systems as well as new energy system methodologies that  capture the dynamics and driver 
30 AI PORTUGAL 2030demands – including consumer  behaviour, energy resources (especially renewable resources), and  the networks that connect the two.  It is also of prime importance to engage industry and governments in  innovative research programmes  to develop standard approaches,  methods, and policies for improving  the long-term performance of the  energy sector while addressing climate change and energy security  concerns. Digital transformation is reshaping the energy industry with an  increased use of renewables, resiliency issues and sustainability concerns to name a few, where digitisation and AI enable that change, i.e.  real time data analytics to improve  efficiency; distributed generation;  and sensors. Digital transformation  together with IoT offers both a short  and long-term solution to coping  with varying regulatory and pricing demands of the energy market  and managing costs, uptime and  service predictably. AI, environment and  biodiversity: from forests and  green economy to marine  species and blue economy AI applied to biodiversity also has  an enormous potential in Portugal,  from marine species and healthy  oceans in a blue economy to forests  for a green economy for Europe,  this is a cutting-edge area where  we want to make a difference. Intelligent data-driven systems applied to precision agriculture, remote sensing and Earth Observation are showing their added value  in new relevant projects. In many of these fields, the Atlantic  International Research Centre (AIR  Centre) can play a determinant  role. The AIR Centre is a knowledge  & data driven long-term multilater-al platform for scientific and technological cooperation in the Atlantic towards a holistic, integrative and systemic approach to knowledge in space,  oceans, climate change impacts, energy and data science.  The AIR Centre  is meant to become a knowledge and data driven network organisation,  enabling innovative work through bottom-up initiatives that will face new  and greater challenges and R&D gaps and Innovation. The AIR_DataNet,  a cross-cutting initiative, is a supercomputing network of facilities and expertise supporting advanced and complex simulation models of the ocean  and atmosphere and large sets of data including the Atlantic Data Cube  and Atlantic GEOSS, two complementary data access tools focused on the  Atlantic Ocean. In addition, a new Fraunhofer Portugal Research Centre on precision agriculture will soon be operational and will conduct research in this field. AI, mobility and autonomous driving Intelligent transport will also open enormous possibilities in AI expertise. The  ultimate goal is to foster the impact of AI in the industry and transportation  sector by creating new jobs through introducing real-time itinerary mapping based on traffic conditions and autonomous driving capabilities. The  combination of AI with the increasing communication capabilities of vehicles to interchange information with other vehicles and road and Internet  infrastructure systems combined with vehicle surrounding perception will  allow for a fully Intelligent Transport System (ITS) able to improve safety,  reduce traffic congestions, enhance the experience of drivers, and achieve  the sustainability of transportation. AI and cybersecurity   Cybersecurity is increasingly important in a society with growing prevalence of information systems, many of which have AI. An increasing number of these systems will be in control of critical facilities and infrastructures,  which provide essential services to all citizens, such as hospitals, power  plants, water purification and provisioning systems, transport, and integrated urban management systems. Others will be ubiquitous in smaller units  such as cars and other vehicles, industrial robots and mobile robotic assistants. Cybersecurity algorithms will require the ability to adapt to new  kinds of attacks and respond accordingly and autonomously in real time.  Moreover, AI will minimise the elapsed time between the detection of an  attack and the system’s corresponding reaction. Nevertheless, AI systems  can be subject to security attacks giving rise to a new and higher level set  of autonomous cybersecurity management practices. AI APPLIED TO BIODIVERSITY HAS ALSO AN ENORMOUS  POTENTIAL IN PORTUGAL, FROM MARINE SPECIES AND  HEAL THY OCEANS IN A BLUE ECONOMY TO FORESTS FOR  A GREEN ECONOMY FOR EUROPE
31 AI PORTUGAL 2030AI and health Ambient Assisted Healthcare can  benefit enormously from AI and AI applications. Big data and data sharing  are essential tools and there is a significant potential for AI to deliver benefits  in this sector, such as by discovering  new drugs, reducing costs, diagnosing  diseases, improving patient care, personal medicine and public health. Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) is one  specific area where AI can play an  essential role, particularly in the support of ageing. AAL Fraunhofer Portugal13 currently materialises itself  through the Fraunhofer Portugal Research Centre for Assistive Information and Communication Solutions  (AICOS), with consolidated competences in Human-Centred Design,  AI and Cyber-Physical Systems. AI and Industry Industry 4.0 is an important movement based on the digitalisation of  industrial processes. AI plays a crucial  role in the monitoring, maintenance  and autonomous operation of industrial processes. Portugal has success  stories in the digitalisation of sectors  such as the shoe industry. The use of  AI will enable a much quicker spread  of efficient management tools for  industries. A very relevant initiative is  the Portugal i4.0 program, which has  been officially launched by the Ministry of Economy with the aim of fostering the uptake of technology in the  Portuguese industry, internationally  promote Portuguese technological  companies and attract investment. Fundamental research  for the Future AI Despite the essential importance of  application areas and domains of  13  AAL Fraunhofer Portugal: www.fraunhofer.pt.specialisation, it is fundamental research that enables the necessary openness of horizons that help shape the future of AI. Companies and the Public  Sector drive the pull of technologies, but academia has the responsibility of  promoting the push of new ideas and technologies yet to be proven. Many  fundamental research areas can be listed, some of them already have a tangible scope of application, while others are motivated by true scientific vision. Important research lines are emerging, such as: Transparent AI: giving algorithms the ability to explain their own decisions and provide a high level and  adaptive account of their workings to promote fairness and accountability;  Emotional AI: algorithms will utilise emotions to achieve better decisions; Autonomous AI: important not only in the automotive sector but also in information systems, cybersecurity, smart cities, industry, etc.; AutoML: intelligent  systems that can use machine learning autonomously; Computational Creativity: producing and creating artistic output is nowadays mostly confined  to human action. However, there are already good examples, which indicate that machines will have a role to play in the cultural industry as well;  Computational Ethics: machines that can acquire, learn, discuss and adapt  moral principles through algorithmic procedures. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > To promote the excellence of fundamental science. > To increase the impact of Portuguese research on AI. > To increase the number of ERC grants on AI brought to Portugal by  candidates working in Portugal. > To take new technologies for the industry and create new industries. SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Foster the development of joint projects, ERC grants and networks  on emergent AI research topics. > Influence Scientific European Policy towards the definition of challenging calls for scientific projects. > Foster the long-term collaboration between companies and academia through framework-contracts. > Participate in the European endeavour to develop a network of  centres of excellence for AI R&D in close cooperation with a wider  spread of digital innovation hubs to ensure AI takeup; > Strengthen the participation in the ongoing partnerships between  the Member States and the EU through joint undertakings such as  Electronic Comoponent and Systems for European Leadership  (ECSEL), for electronic components and systems, EuroHPC-JU the  European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (EuroHPC-JU), for high-performing computing, and the Quantum Flagship under the Research and Innovation Programme Horizon 2020,  key to processing big data and sustain further developments in AI; > Lead and participate in proposals for European cross-border Projects of Common Interest (energy area). 
32 AI PORTUGAL 2030Public administration and its modernisation The programme aims to support R&D activities that contribute to strengthen scientific and technological competencies to deal with the vast amounts  of data generated in Public Administration. The goal is to use and combine  this administrative data with data from other sources to better inform our  public policies and decision-making processes, which should be increasingly supported by evidence and not by intuition. And, ultimately, to change  public service provision from a reactive paradigm to an anticipatory paradigm. It will contribute to the appropriation and incorporation of scientific knowledge to support operational decision systems and to enable the production of new knowledge with the goal of finding solutions for particular and  real problems in public entities in order to address relevant issues for citizens in any area of governance.  Currently 19 R&D projects are being funded through the “FCT´s Mobilising  programme to foster AI in public administration”: four initial pilot projects  aim to support already established and mature partnerships between the  R&D community and public administration; 15 additional projects were selected by an independent scientific panel under a specific call aiming to  identify and foster new partnerships. A second call promoted by the FCT  and a dedicated call promoted within the System to Support the Modernisation and Capacitation of Public Administration (SAMA2020) will fund  more projects in 2019.  These 19 ongoing projects result from the cooperation between scientific  institutions and entities of the public administration and are being developed under the innovation axis of INCoDe.2030 (National Digital Competencies Initiative). They cover several governance areas such as health,  education, transportation and urban mobility, economic activity and land  use planning. Qualification and specialisation Qualification and Specialisation, two INCoDE axes, are key to the development of AI driven innovation and economy in Portugal. To qualify human resources at different levels (professional courses, bachelors, masters, post-graduate specialisations, PhD and post-doc) is a challenge for  a number of different reasons despite the excellent quality of both our institutions and students. Most importantly, skills are related to ICT in general  and AI skills in particular, including data science. However, other supporting  skills will be important as well. Portugal is increasingly chosen as a setup point by international technological companies while national IT firms show a tremendous growth in size  and number (new ICT companies have doubled per year from 2007 to  2017). Moreover, non-IT companies hire more and more staff with ICT skills.  Even though Portugal is close to the European average in terms of digital  competences (15th in the DESI 2017 Index, Digital Economy and Society Index  of the European Commission), it needs to reinforce ICT competences.  This  applies to specialists, who need to be able to make the most of the growing  availability of jobs in the digital market, but also to the entire human capital,  increasing for example internet usage levels, which are still worryingly low. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > Make administrative data easier  for research units and, public  and private  to access providing  a secure access and respecting  personal privacy issues;  > Continue to foster  collaboration between public  sector entities, businesses and  research units concerning the  use of AI; > Promote new and innovative  solutions for administrative  simplification, namely under the  SIMPLEX program; > Reinforce public sector skills  and capabilities with respect to  AI and data science; > Assure the ethical use of AI in  public administration; SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Develop a National Data  Infrastructure managed by  the National Statistics Office  (INE - Instituto Nacional de  Estatística), which will constitute  a centralised repository for  administrative data; > Continue to fund collaborative  projects between the public  sector and research units  to develop administrative  modernisation innovative  solutions; > Create a Collaborative  Laboratory for AI in the Public  Administration led by a public  sector organisation; > Reinforce already existing  AI and data science skill  qualification programmes  within the public sector in  collaboration with Higher  Education Institutions; > Include public sector  organisations in the ethics  committee for AI;
33 AI PORTUGAL 2030Portugal offers a training infrastructure as well as the human potential  capable of being (re)qualified to meet the demands of employment opportunities that are typical of modern societies such as Portugal. However,  this (re)qualification is a demanding task that requires mobilisation and a  combination of efforts from different areas of governance and civil society.  Digital competences are also intrinsically linked to employability - increasing digitalisation in the labour market requires new competences but offers  a wider range of opportunities. A more skilled active population generates  more jobs as well as innovative markets and products generating more  competitive and robust economic activities. At the same time, the country itself must be an active agent in the global effort  to produce new scientific computing knowledge and develop the capacity to  manage and use large amounts of information. This will help ensure a better  position in Europe and in the world. We cannot wait to find out what the new  technologies will be; we have to create them and work with them. Qualification in exploiting AI is, for example, the cornerstone of Industry  4.0. Both specialisation and research have to deal with advanced AI techniques and solutions mastering them at a theoretical and technological  level, developing and implementing new solutions in many different areas,  such as health, space, maritime, industry, agriculture, cities, services and  mobility, to name a few. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > Increase the overall number of human resources qualified in ICT in general and in AI in particular at the  different levels of education, including short cycles for initial training and adult training, as well as graduate  education/specialisation for adults. > Enable the development of transferable skills in academia to industry through their effective acquisition by  learners in the former, in close cooperation with companies and the public administration. > Increase the participation of women in technological areas, namely in ICT in general and AI in particular,  and thus augment the potential of the human capital. > Promote the attractiveness of Portugal to foreign talent, including students, researchers and experienced  professionals, and reduce border obstacles when justified. > Promote the experimentation of new AI ideas and concepts in Portugal, including forms of cooperation  among national and international higher education institutions and firms or the public administration. SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Develop qualification at the regional level, including higher education institutions and local, public and  private actors in the form of “Regional/local Networks for Digital Qualification” following the ongoing  experience in the development of short cycles in Polytechnics, but further promoting adult training  for reskilling and upskilling actions (i.e. Switch, Acertar o Rumo, Apostar em TI). It should consider the  development of focused intensive courses for reskilling in close cooperation with companies and the private  and public sectors; > Further promote the development of graduate specialisation programmes (MSc and PhD) including  executive education for adults in close cooperation with firms and the public administration. > Launch a series of E-Learning courses covering fundamental aspects of AI and specific application domains  leveraging on the results from Fundação para a Computação Científica Nacional (FCCN)’s project NAU.   > Foster international AI and ICT talents to come study and/or work in Portugal, including ongoing actions  through the “Study and research in Portugal” initiative.PORTUGAL OFFERS  A TRAINING  INFRASTRUCTURE  AS WELL AS THE  HUMAN POTENTIAL  CAPABLE OF BEING  (RE)QUALIFIED TO  MEET THE DEMANDS  OF EMPLOYMENT  OPPORTUNITIES  TYPICAL  OF MODERN  SOCIETIES SUCH AS  OURS
34 AI PORTUGAL 2030Inclusion and Education:  disseminating generalist  knowledge on AI Digital Inclusion and Education for  all is an essential component of  AI development. More extensive  knowledge and skills will facilitate an  adaptation to changes in professions. Opportunities for expanding  qualification contents will be integrated in education programmes.  The aim is to avoid highly specialised competence in an excessively  narrow field.  Digital Inclusion and Education are  two main axes of the INCoDe.2030  working towards securing a prominent place in terms of digital skills  until the end of the next decade.  Digital inclusion Digital Inclusion actions and projects may consider the development of CCDIs taking into account  progress experience in some Portuguese regions within the context of  INCoDe.2030. Each project needs  to serve specific purposes in terms  of local and institutional requirements. Education Portugal needs to change its digital  education strategy from the use of  ICT technology to the understanding of its fundamental Computer  Science elements. This knowledge  will empower students to approach  a wide variety of problems by developing new digital solutions as  well as providing the necessary basis to support the introduction of AI  contents. Performing this change in the digital  education paradigm in schools can  only be accomplished by a new initiative totally devoted to promoting  change and new practices among teachers in line with the shift from ICT use to Computing competence (i.e.  motivate new networks, communities of practice, and grassroot organisations) involving, first and foremost, current ICT teachers, school headmasters, the government, academia and private companies and institutions  that understand and share the importance of this change and are available to support it in different ways. The beginning of such a movement is of  the utmost importance to prepare future generations for not only dealing  with but striving in a digital and AI world. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES > Use ICT to change digital education. > Provide the necessary basis for education in AI. > Disseminate STEM knowledge. > Promote early acquisition of coding skills. SPECIFIC ACTIONS > Organisation of workshops involving National stakeholders (ICT  teachers, school headmasters, government officials, academia and  interested private sector organisations) and international experts from  the different aspects of the project. > Preparation of support material and digital infrastructure in collaboration with Ciência Viva with the help of national and international  experts and organisations with proven experience: Creation of a computing study program for each level of education integrated with the  study programs for other subjects; development of classroom material: classroom activities, schemes of work and evaluation methodologies; development of a digital platform for communication with and  between all stakeholders, namely for the publication and discussion of  classroom material and activities, national and local events, discussion  fora, and online (auto)evaluation of teachers and students. > Specification of an online evaluation platform for students comprehending a common corpus of questions and tracking results for ex  post  analysis. > Promotion of the entire initiative by traditional and digital media.  > Teaching young students the fundamentals of machine learning replicating actions already under way i.e. in some Ciência Viva schools,  among others) in schools and in “Science Clubs” (forming trainers that  replicate the work in progress).  > Development of creative / collaborative multimedia content on science through for example networking actions bringing together schools  and several Science Clubs for collaborative video creation on key STEM  (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) subjects. > Development of programming/coding capabilities by involving teams  of academia to develop a platform in which schools and Science Clubs  can launch their own Coding Fests allowing for more events to be held  during the year. Students will be able to learn not only how to solve  problems but also how to create and define problems drawing on their  creative capability.
35 AI PORTUGAL 203010New developments  and supporting areas  in European and  international networks Advan ced computing:  supercomputing Portugal is actively engaged in contributing for an effective European  strategy on advanced computing.  We wish to be an active contributor  to the EuroHPC future ecosystem in  parallel with our activities in grid and  distributed computing. For this purpose, we are currently conducting  the installation of a new supercomputer facility optimised  to support  a large spectrum of relevant critical  areas such as artificial intelligence,  deep learning, digital modelling  and data science, either in close  association with the development  of frontier research areas or the  development of new applications  and markets in a range of sectors,  including Atlantic Interactions, Energy systems and services, Earth  Observation and new space, precision agriculture and smart farming,  health systems, and public administration and services, among others.  These would be the driving objec-tives of the new system. As such,  we envisage that a multi-platform  system may be the best option in  order to accommodate a broad  range of applications. Existing facilities are: the Minho Advanced Computing Centre  (MACC); the recently opened Advanced Computing Centre of the  University of Coimbra (UC-LCA)  and the C4 – Competence Centre  in Cloud Computing14. Quantum materials and  quantum computing Quantum computing and quantum materials are another challenge we want to embrace.  The International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory (INL), located in Braga, hosts the Quanta Lab  and the Academic Hub of the IBM  Q Network. INL is the only Intergovernmental Research Organisation  in the world within the field of Nanotechnology with a modern and  well-equipped laboratory encompassing possibilities to study and  fabricate everything from DNAchips to electronics and sensors in  14  C4 – Competence Centre in Cloud  Computing: http://c4.ubi.pta complete and true interdisciplinary way with capacity to make  pilot production of proof-of-concepts. Their strong interdisciplinary  research integrates most scientific  fields such as physics, electronics,  biology, mathematics, pharmacy,  and medicine. AI is a cornerstone of  the INL R&D Strategy. Facing societal challenges  brought by AI: Ethics and  safety AI systems will make important  and critical decisions autonomously. Society will demand  transparency (the ability to explain the decisions) and auditability (the ability to trace the flow  of decisions and actions from  humans to algorithm) in order to  promote safety and ethical principles, including privacy protection  and fairness. We will need best  practices to assess AI projects in  terms of risks to safety and ethics  and mechanisms to detect and  prevent misuse of advanced AI  techniques. The legal framework  will have to be adjusted to determine liability in conflicts with the  involvement of AI decision making.  THIS DOCUMENT’S  LIFE CYCLEThis document’s life cycle The strategy will be monitored by  a Committee coordinated by FCT  (Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia) and this supporting document  will be annually reviewed.
36 AI PORTUGAL 2030 PORTUGUESE NA TIONAL  INITIA TIVE ON DIGIT AL SKILLSAI PORTUGAL  2030 An innovation and growth strategy  to foster Artificial Intelligence in  Portugal in the European context
