The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading human  rights organisation. It comprises 47 member states, 28 of  which are members of the European Union. All Council of  Europe member states have signed up to the European  Convention on Human Rights, a treaty designed to  protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law.  The European Court of Human Rights oversees the  implementation of the Convention in the member states. www.coe.intThe guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the  digital environment were adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the  Council of Europe on 4 July 2018.  This publication contains the recommendations, addressed to all member  states of the Council of Europe, followed by useful, thematically directed  sections to guide states on fundamental principles and rights, operational  principles and measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the  child in the digital environment, national frameworks and international  co-operation and co-ordination. The purpose of the guidelines is to assist states and other relevant  stakeholders in their efforts to adopt a comprehensive, strategic approach in  building and containing the often complex world of the digital environment.  Ensuring children’s interaction and safety in this environment is paramount.  Among the many topics covered are the protection of personal data,  provision of child-friendly content adapted to their evolving capacities,  helplines and hotlines, vulnerability and resilience, as well as the role and  responsibilities of business enterprises. In addition, the guidelines call upon  states to engage with children, including in decision-making processes,  to ensure that national policies adequately address developments in the  digital environment. These guidelines are of interest to a very wide audience, ranging from  national authority bodies, professionals, civil society, business and industry  sectors, to families and children themselves. Guidelines to respect,   protect and fulfil the   rights of the child in the  digital environment Building a Europe  for and with childrenwww.coe.int/childrenENG Prems 101818

Guidelines to respect,   protect and fulfil the   rights of the child in the  digital environment Recommendation CM/Rec(2018)7   of the Committee of Ministers  Council of Europe
French edition: Lignes directrices relatives au respect, à la  protection et à la réalisation des droits de  l’enfant dans l’environnement numérique Recommandation CM/Rec(2018)7 du  Comité des Ministres aux États membres All requests concerning the reproduction  or translation of all or part of this  document should be addressed to the  Directorate of Communication (F-67075  Strasbourg Cedex or publishing@coe.int).   All other correspondence concerning  this document should be addressed  to  Directorate General of Democracy Cover and layout: Documents and  Publications Production Department  (SPDP), Council of Europe  Photo: © Shutterstock  © Council of Europe, September 2018 Printed at the Council of Europe
 ► Page 3Contents FOREWORD  5 RECOMMENDATION CM/REC(2018)7 OF THE COMMITTEE OF MINISTERS TO  MEMBER STATES ON GUIDELINES TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND FULFIL THE  RIGHTS OF THE CHILD IN THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT  7 PREAMBLE  7 GUIDELINES TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND FULFIL THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD   IN THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT  11 1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE  11 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES AND RIGHTS  12 2.1. Best interests of the child 12 2.2. Evolving capacities of the child 12 2.3. Right to non-discrimination 12 2.4. Right to be heard 13 2.5. Duty to engage other stakeholders 13 3. OPERATIONAL PRINCIPLES AND MEASURES TO RESPECT, PROTECT AND  FULFIL THE RIGHTS OF THE CHILD IN THE DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT  13 3.1. Access to the digital environment 13 3.2. Right to freedom of expression and information 14 3.3. Participation, right to engage in play and right to assembly and association 15 3.4. Privacy and data protection 16 3.5. Right to education 18 3.6. The right to protection and safety 19 3.7. Remedies 22 4. NATIONAL FRAMEWORKS  23 4.1. Legal framework 23 4.2. Policy and institutional frameworks 24 4.3. Co-operation and co-ordination at national level 28 5. INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION AND CO-ORDINATION  29

 ► Page 5Foreword  As a human rights organisation, a key aim of the Council of Europe in the digital  environment is to offer an open, inclusive and secure internet (and other ICTs) to all,  including children, while ensuring the protection of their human rights. Through its  thematic and transversal strategies, the Council of Europe is taking action to protect  children in the digital environment, to empower them and to protect them from the  violence they may be subject to in all settings. The digital environment shapes children’s lives in many ways, creating opportunities  and risks to their well-being and enjoyment of human rights. With the adoption  of the Guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital  environment, governments are invited to review their legislation, policies and  practices to ensure that these adequately address the full range of the rights of the  child. States should also ensure that business enterprises and other key partners  meet their human rights responsibilities and are held accountable in case of abuses,  while also fostering businesses’ engagement and co-operation where appropriate.  As such, these guidelines, when read together with the Council of Europe Strategy  for the Rights of the Child (2016-2021), the Internet Governance Strategy (2016-2019)  as well as the Human Rights Guide to Internet Users, form a solid set of ground rules  which can assist states in providing the necessary basis for looking after children’s  best interests in the complex but fascinating world of the digital environment. One of the strengths of the Council of Europe is its ability to adopt legal standards,  which support states in putting systems in place that contribute to ensuring the  respect for human rights, promoting democracy and protecting the rule of law. Given  the speed at which new technologies emerge, the guidelines also propose measures  to address risks facing children as they learn and explore in this virtual world. Snežana Samardžić-Marković  Director General of Democracy

 ► Page 7Recommendation   CM/Rec(2018)7 of the  Committee of Ministers  to member States on  Guidelines to respect,   protect and fulfil the   rights of the child in the  digital environment (Adopted by the Committee of  Ministers on 4 July 2018 at the 1321st  meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies) Preamble The Committee of Ministers, under the terms of Article 15.b of the Statute of the  Council of Europe, Considering that the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity  between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and promoting the ideals  and principles which are their common heritage, inter alia by promoting common  policies and standards; Reaffirming the commitment of member States to ensure that every child enjoys  the full range of human rights enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the  Rights of the Child (UNCRC), in the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights  and Fundamental Freedoms (ETS No. 5), and their protocols, and that these rights  should be fully respected, protected and fulfilled, as technology continues to develop; Having regard to the obligations and commitments as undertaken within other relevant international and European conventions, such as the revised European Social  Charter (ETS No. 163), the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to  Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108), the Convention on Cybercrime  (ETS No. 185) and its Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation of acts of a  racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS No. 189),  the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings 
Page 8 ► Guidelines(CETS No. 197), the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children  against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201), the Convention on  Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence (CETS  No. 210) and taking into account the recommendations, resolutions and declarations  of the Committee of Ministers and of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of  Europe in this field; Recognising that the digital environment is complex and subject to rapid evolution,  and is reshaping children’s lives in many ways, resulting in opportunities for and risks  to their well-being and enjoyment of human rights; Conscious that information and communication technologies (ICTs) are an important  tool in children’s lives for education, socialisation, expression and inclusion, while at  the same time their use can generate risks, including violence, exploitation and abuse; Bearing in mind the Council of Europe Strategy for the Rights of the Child (20162021), which identified the rights of the child in the digital environment as one of  its priority areas, and the Council of Europe Internet Governance Strategy (20162019), according to which the internet should be a safe, secure, open and enabling  environment for everyone, children included, without discrimination; Recognising that children are entitled to receive support and guidance in their  discovery and use of the digital environment, respecting the rights and dignity of  children and others; Determined to contribute effectively to ensuring that consistent policies are being  devised, with the participation of children, that take into account the interdependence of opportunities and risks in the digital environment and the need to ensure  that appropriate measures are in place so that the rights of the child are respected,  protected and fulfilled; Emphasising that States have the primary responsibility to respect, protect and fulfil  the rights of the child, and reaffirming the rights, role and responsibility of parents  or carers to provide, in a manner consistent with the best interests and evolving  capacities of the child, appropriate direction and guidance for children to exercise  their rights; Recognising also that business enterprises have a responsibility to respect human  rights, including the rights of the child, as affirmed in Recommendation CM/Rec(2016)3  of the Committee of Ministers to member States on human rights and business, the  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child General Comment No. 16 (2013)  on State obligations regarding the impact of the business sector on children’s rights,  the United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights (2011), the  Council of Europe Guidelines for the  co-operation between law enforcement and  internet service providers against cybercrime (2008), the Human Rights Guidelines  for Internet service providers (Council of Europe and EuroISPA) (2008) and the Human  Rights Guidelines for online games providers (Council of Europe and ISFE) (2008),  and the Children’s Rights and Business Principles (2012) drawn up by UNICEF, the  UN Global Compact and the NGO Save the Children;
Recommendation CM/Rec(2018)7 ► Page 9Conscious that policies in this area require a combination of public and private,  legal and voluntary measures, that all relevant public and private stakeholders share  responsibility for ensuring the rights of the child in the digital environment, and that  co-ordination of their actions is necessary; Taking into account the views and opinions of children consulted in member States  of the Council of Europe; Recognising the need to develop guidance to assist States and other relevant stake holders in their efforts to adopt a comprehensive, strategic approach for respecting,  protecting and fulfilling the rights of the child in the digital environment, rooted  in the standards established by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the  Child and the Council of Europe and underpinned by the meaningful participation  of children, Recommends that the governments of the member States: 1. review their legislation, policies and practice to ensure that they are in line with  the recommendations, principles and further guidance set out in the appendix  of this recommendation, promote their implementation in all relevant areas  and evaluate the effectiveness of the measures taken at regular intervals, with  the participation of relevant stakeholders; 2. ensure that this recommendation, including the guidelines in the appendix, is  translated and disseminated as widely as possible among competent authori ties and stakeholders, including parliaments, specialised public agencies and  civil society organisations, as well as children, in a child-friendly manner and  through accessible means, modes and formats of communication; 3. require business enterprises to meet their responsibility to respect the rights of  the child in the digital environment and to take implementing measures, and  encourage them to co-operate with relevant State stakeholders, civil society  organisations and children, taking into account relevant international and  European standards and guidance; 4. co-operate with the Council of Europe by creating, implementing and monitoring strategies and programmes that respect, protect and fulfil the rights of  the child in the digital environment, and share, on a regular basis, examples  of strategies, action plans, legislation and good practices related to the imple mentation of this recommendation; 5. examine the implementation of this recommendation and the guidelines in  its appendix within the Committee of Ministers and with the participation  of relevant stakeholders every five years at least and, if appropriate, at more  frequent intervals.

 ► Page 11Appendix to Recommendation  CM/Rec(2018)7  Guidelines to respect,   protect and fulfil the   rights of the child in the  digital environment 1. Purpose and scope International and European binding instruments and standards set out obligations  or provide benchmarks for member States to respect, protect and fulfil the human  rights and fundamental freedoms of children in the digital environment. Every child,  as an individual rights-holder, should be able to exercise his or her human rights and  fundamental freedoms online as well as offline. The present guidelines are intended to provide assistance to relevant stakeholders  in the implementation of the rights enshrined in international and European human  rights conventions and standards, in the light of the case law of the European Court  of Human Rights. They seek in particular to: a. guide States in formulating legislation, policies and other measures to promote  the realisation of the full array of the rights of the child in the digital environment and address the full range of ways in which the digital environment  affects children’s well-being and enjoyment of human rights; b. promote the devising, implementation and monitoring by States of a com prehensive strategic and co-ordinated approach, reflecting the principles  contained in the present guidelines; c. ensure that States require business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders to meet their responsibility to respect the rights of the child in the digital  environment and encourage them to support and promote these rights; d. ensure concerted action and co-operation at national and international level  to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital environment.
Page 12 ► GuidelinesFor the purpose of this text:  ►“child” refers to any person under the age of 18 years;  ►“digital environment” is understood as encompassing information and communication technologies (ICTs), including the internet, mobile and associated  technologies and devices, as well as digital networks, databases, content and  services. 2. Fundamental principles and rights The principles and rights set out below should be read as applying to all sections  of these guidelines. 2.1. Best interests of the child 1. In all actions concerning children in the digital environment, the best interests  of the child shall be a primary consideration. In assessing the best interests of a  child, States should make every effort to balance, and wherever possible, reconcile  a child’s right to protection with other rights, in particular the right to freedom of  expression and information as well as participation rights. 2.2. Evolving capacities of the child 2. The capacities of a child develop gradually from birth to the age of 18. Moreover,  individual children reach different levels of maturity at different ages. States and  other relevant stakeholders should recognise the evolving capacities of children,  including those of children with disabilities or in vulnerable situations, and ensure  that policies and practices are adopted to respond to their respective needs in relation to the digital environment. This also means, for example, that policies adopted  to fulfil the rights of adolescents may differ significantly from those adopted for  younger children. 2.3. Right to non-discrimination 3. The rights of the child apply to all children without discrimination on any  grounds. All rights are to be granted without discrimination of any kind, irrespec tive of the child’s age, and the child’s or his or her parents’ or legal guardians’ race,  colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social  origin, property, disability, birth,1 or other status. 4. Whereas efforts should be undertaken to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of  each and every child in the digital environment, targeted measures may be needed  for children in vulnerable situations, recognising that the digital environment has  the potential both to increase children’s vulnerability and to empower, protect and  support them. 1.  United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 2.1.
Appendix ► Page 132.4. Right to be heard 5. Children have the right to express themselves freely in all matters affecting  them, and their views should be given due weight in accordance with their age and  maturity. 6. States and other relevant stakeholders should provide children with information  on their rights, including their participation rights, in a way they can understand,  and which is appropriate to their maturity and circumstances. They should enhance  opportunities for them to express themselves through ICTs as a complement to  face-to-face participation. Children should be informed of mechanisms and services  providing adequate support, and of procedures for complaints, remedies or redress  should their rights be violated. Such information should also be made available to  their parents or carers to enable them to support children in exercising their rights. 7. Furthermore, States and other relevant stakeholders should actively engage  children to participate meaningfully in devising, implementing and evaluating  legislation, policies, mechanisms, practices, technologies and resources that aim to  respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital environment. 2.5. Duty to engage other stakeholders 8. In accordance with relevant international standards, States have the primary  obligation to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of every child within their jurisdic tion and must engage all relevant stakeholders, in particular educational and child  protection and care systems, public institutions and business enterprises, civil society  stakeholders, as well as children themselves and their parents, legal guardian or any  other person who takes care of the child, in order to effectively implement these  obligations. 9. Concerning the digital environment, each State should apply such measures  as may be necessary to require that business enterprises meet their responsibility  to respect the rights of the child in all their operations within the State’s jurisdiction,  and, as appropriate, in all their operations abroad when domiciled in its jurisdiction.  Furthermore, States should encourage and support by other relevant means business enterprises in understanding and respecting the rights of the child. 3. Operational principles and measures to respect,  protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the digital  environment 3.1. Access to the digital environment 10. Access to and use of the digital environment is important for the realisation of  children’s rights and fundamental freedoms, for their inclusion, education, participa tion and for maintaining family and social relationships. Where children do not have  access to the digital environment or where this access is limited as a result of poor  connectivity, their ability to fully exercise their human rights may be affected. 11. States should make appropriate arrangements to ensure that all children have  adequate, affordable and secure access to devices, connectivity, services and content 
Page 14 ► Guidelineswhich is specifically intended for children. Insofar as this is possible, in dedicated  public spaces, States should take measures to render access to the digital environment free of charge. 12. States should ensure that access to the digital environment is provided in  educational and other care settings for children. Specific measures should be taken  for children in vulnerable situations, in particular children living in alternative care,  children deprived of liberty or whose parents are deprived of liberty, children in the  context of international migration, children in street situations and children in rural  communities. In particular, States should require online service providers to ensure  that their services are accessible by children with disabilities. 13. Connectivity and access to devices, services and content should be accom panied by appropriate education and literacy measures, including those which  address gender stereotypes or social norms that could limit children’s access and  use of technology. 14. States should ensure that terms and conditions that are associated with the  use of a device which can connect to the internet or that apply to the provision of  online services or content are accessible, fair, transparent, intelligible, available in  the child’s language and formulated in clear, child-friendly and age-appropriate  language where relevant. 15. States should ensure a plurality of sources of high-quality information and  educational digital content and services for children. Children’s rights should be  taken into account in related public procurement procedures, for instance for educational tools, so that access to and use of digital services and content is not unduly  restricted by commercial interests or filters. 3.2. Right to freedom of expression and information 16. The digital environment has considerable potential to support the realisation  of children’s right to freedom of expression, including to seek, receive and impart  information and ideas of all kinds. States should take measures to guarantee children’s  right to hold and express any views, opinions or expressions on matters of importance  to them, through the media of their choice, and irrespective of whether or not their  views and opinions are received favourably by the State or other stakeholders. 17. Children, as creators and distributors of information in the digital environment,  should be made aware by States, especially through educational programmes, of  how to exercise their right to freedom of expression in the digital environment while  respecting the rights and dignity of others, including other children. In particular, such  programmes should address aspects such as freedom of expression and legitimate  restrictions thereon, for example to respect intellectual property rights or prohibit  incitement to hatred and violence. 18. States should initiate and encourage the provision of diverse high-quality  online content and services of social and cultural benefit to children in support of  their fullest development and participation in society. This should include the largest  possible amount of high-quality content that is specifically made for children, easy  for them to find and understand, provided in their language, and which is adapted 
Appendix ► Page 15to their age and maturity. In this context, information on the rights of the child,  including in the digital environment; on news; on health; and on sexuality, among  other resources of benefit to them, is particularly important. In particular, States  should ensure that children are able to locate and explore public service media and  high-quality content likely to be of benefit to them. 19. Where States make provision for media, these should involve children in active  forms of communication, encouraging the provision of user-generated content and  establishing other participatory schemes. Attention should also be paid to children’s  access to, and presence and portrayal in, media online. 20. Any restrictions on children’s right to freedom of expression and information in  the digital environment should comply with international and European human rights  conventions and standards. States should take measures to ensure that children are  informed of restrictions in place, such as content filtering, in a manner appropriate to  their evolving capacities, and that they are provided with guidance on appropriate  remedies, including on how and to whom to make a complaint, report an abuse or  request help and counselling. Where appropriate, parents or carers should also be  informed of such restrictions and appropriate remedies. 3.3. Participation, right to engage in play and right to assembly  and association 21. The digital environment provides distinctive opportunities for the rights of  the child to participate, to engage in play and to peaceful assembly and association,  including through online communication, gaming, networking and entertainment.  States should co-operate with other stakeholders to provide for access of children  to such activities that can foster participation, inclusion, digital citizenship and  resilience both online and offline. 22. Recognising children’s right to engage in play and recreational activities  appropriate to their age and maturity, States should provide a range of incentives,  investment opportunities, standards and technical guidance for the production and  distribution of digital content and services of social, civic, artistic, cultural, educational  and recreational benefit to all children. This includes interactive and play-based tools  that stimulate skills such as creativity, teamwork and problem solving appropriate  to their evolving capacities and with particular attention to the needs of children  in vulnerable situations. Where children participate in the creation or production of  these tools, measures should be in place to protect the child’s intellectual property  rights. 23. States should provide children with information appropriate to their age and  maturity, including in non-written forms and through social networking and other  media, on their rights, in particular their participation rights. States should also inform  them of the opportunities available to them, and where they can get support to take  advantage of these opportunities. 24. States should take measures to ensure that children are able to participate effec tively in local, national and global public-policy and political debates and to support  the development of online civic and social platforms to facilitate their participation  and their enjoyment of the right to assembly and association, strengthening their 
Page 16 ► Guidelinescapacity for democratic citizenship and political awareness. States should also ensure  that children’s participation in the digital environment is acted upon meaningfully,  building on existing good practice for child participation and available tools for  assessment. 25. States should take measures to protect children exercising their right to  peaceful assembly and association in the digital environment from monitoring and  surveillance, whether carried out by State authorities directly or in collaboration with  private sector entities. Where such measures interfere with the exercise by children  of their rights, they should be subject to conditions and safeguards against abuse,  in line with international and European human rights conventions and standards.  Notably, they should be prescribed by a law which is accessible, precise, clear and  foreseeable, pursue a legitimate aim, be necessary in a democratic society and  proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued, and allow for effective remedies. 3.4. Privacy and data protection 26. Children have a right to private and family life in the digital environment, which  includes the protection of their personal data and respect for the confidentiality of  their correspondence and private communications. 27. States must respect, protect and fulfil the right of the child to privacy and  data protection. States should ensure that relevant stakeholders, in particular those  processing personal data, but also the child’s peers, parents or carers, and educators,  are made aware of and respect the child’s right to privacy and data protection. 28. States and other stakeholders should ensure that children are made aware of  how to exercise their right to privacy and data protection, taking into account their  age and maturity and, where appropriate, with the direction and guidance of their  parents, carers, legal guardians or other persons legally responsible for the child in  a manner consistent with the evolving capacities of the child. 29. Recognising that personal data can be processed to the benefit of children,  States should take measures to ensure that children’s personal data is processed fairly,  lawfully, accurately and securely, for specific purposes and with the free, explicit,  informed and unambiguous consent of the children and/or their parents, carer or  legal representative, or in accordance with another legitimate basis laid down by  law. The data minimisation principle should be respected, meaning that the personal  data processing should be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the  purposes for which they are processed. 30. Where States take measures to decide upon an age at which children are considered to be capable of consenting to the processing of personal data, their rights,  views, best interests and evolving capacities must be taken into consideration. This  should be monitored and evaluated while taking into account children’s actual  understanding of data collection practices and technological developments. When  children are below that age and parental consent is required, States should require  that reasonable efforts are made to verify that consent is given by the parent or legal  representative of the child.
Appendix ► Page 1731. States should ensure that the likely impact of intended data processing on the  rights of the child is assessed and that the data processing is designed to prevent  or minimise the risk of interference with those rights. 32. States should ensure that the processing of special categories of data which  are considered sensitive, such as genetic data, biometric data uniquely identifying  a child, personal data relating to criminal convictions, and personal data that reveal  racial or ethnic origins, political opinions, religious or other beliefs, mental and phys ical health, or sexual life, should in all instances only be allowed where appropriate  safeguards are enshrined in law. 33. States should ensure that easily accessible, meaningful, child-friendly and  age-appropriate information about privacy tools, settings and remedies is made  available to children. Children and/or their parents or carers or legal representatives  should be informed by a data controller how their personal data is being processed.  This should include information for instance on how data is collected, stored, used  and disclosed, on their rights to access their data, to rectify or erase this data or  object to its processing, and how to exercise their rights. 34. States should ensure that children and/or their parents, carers or legal repre sentative have the right to withdraw their consent to the processing of their personal  data, have access to their personal data and to have it rectified or erased, notably  when the processing is unlawful or when it compromises their dignity, safety or  privacy. 35. In relation to the processing of children’s personal data, States should imple ment, or require relevant stakeholders to implement, privacy-by-default settings  and privacy-by-design measures, taking into account the best interests of the child.  Such measures should integrate strong safeguards for the right to privacy and data  protection into devices and services. 36. With respect to connected or smart devices, including those incorporated in  toys and clothes, States should take particular care to ensure that data-protection  principles, rules and rights are also respected when such products are directed  principally at children or are likely to be regularly used by or in physical proximity  to children. 37. Profiling of children, which is any form of automated processing of personal  data which consists of applying a “profile” to a child, particularly in order to take deci sions concerning the child or to analyse or predict his or her personal preferences,  behaviour and attitudes, should be prohibited by law. In exceptional circumstances,  States may lift this restriction when it is in the best interests of the child or if there  is an overriding public interest, on the condition that appropriate safeguards are  provided for by law. 38. Children shall not be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with their  privacy in the digital environment. Measures which may restrict children’s right to  privacy must be carried out in accordance with the law, pursue a legitimate aim,  be necessary in a democratic society and be proportionate to the legitimate aim  pursued. Surveillance or interception measures in particular must comply with these  conditions and should be subject to effective, independent and impartial oversight.
Page 18 ► Guidelines39. States should not prohibit in law or practice anonymity, pseudonymity or the  usage of encryption technologies for children. 3.5. Right to education 40. States should actively invest in and promote the opportunities offered by the  digital environment to realise children’s right to education. The goal of education is  the development of the child’s personality, talents and mental and physical abilities  to their fullest potential, and the preparation of the child for a responsible life in a  free society. In support of this goal, it is important that the knowledge and resources  of the digital environment are available to all children in a way that is inclusive and  takes into account children’s evolving capacities and the particular circumstances  of children in vulnerable situations. Digital literacy 41. States should promote the development of digital literacy, including media  and information literacies and digital citizenship education, to ensure that children  have the competence to engage in the digital environment wisely and the resilience  to cope with its associated risks. Digital literacy education should be included in the  basic education curriculum from the earliest years, taking into account children’s  evolving capacities. 42. In support of a wide range of rights of the child, digital literacy education  should include the technical or functional competences to use a wide range of  online tools and resources, as well as skills related to content creation and the critical  understanding of the digital environment, its opportunities and risks. 43. Digital literacy should be effectively promoted in the settings where children  use the internet, especially schools and organisations working with and for children.  States should also promote and support the digital literacy of parents or carers through  the State’s established mechanisms for reaching parents as an essential means of  creating a safer and sustainable digital environment for children and families. 44. Recognising the potential advantages of educational policies that use digital  networks to connect formal and non-formal learning, including at home, States  should ensure that this does not disadvantage children who lack resources at home  or live in residential institutions. 45. Particular efforts should be made by States and other relevant stakeholders,  through the education and cultural system, to support and promote the digital  literacy of children who have little or no access to digital technology for socio-geo graphical or socio-economic reasons, as well as sometimes for reasons of place of  residence and also of children who have access to but do not use digital technology,  who lack the skills to use or underuse digital technology for reasons of vulnerability,  in particular for children with disabilities. 46. States should also make efforts to enhance the use of information and communication technology by girls and to promote the equality of opportunities and  outcomes for all children.
Appendix ► Page 19Educational programmes and resources 47. States should ensure that sufficient high-quality educational resources, physical  devices and infrastructures are available to benefit children’s operation in the digital  environment and support their formal, non-formal and informal education. These  may be developed and distributed in co-operation with other relevant stakeholders.  Such provision should be evaluated according to current good practice and necessary actions taken by States and other stakeholders to maintain high standards of  education relevant to the digital environment. 48. States should develop and strengthen education and awareness-raising initiatives and programmes and user tools for children, parents or carers, and educators and volunteers working with children, with the involvement of children. Such  programmes should include knowledge on preventive measures, on rights and  responsibilities in the digital environment, identification and reporting of violations,  remedies and available redress. Specifically, such programmes should teach chil dren to understand, as appropriate according to their age and evolving capacities,  what it means to give consent, to respect other fundamental rights, their own and  those of others, to seek redress when needed and to use available tools to protect  and fulfil their rights in the digital environment. Furthermore, they should enable  children to understand and deal with potentially harmful content (such as violence  and self-harm, adult pornography, child sexual abuse material, discrimination and  racism, hate speech) and behaviour (such as the solicitation of children for sexual  purposes or “grooming” , bullying or harassment, unlawful processing of personal  data, violation of intellectual property rights), and potential consequences of the  way in which information about children or shared by children might be further  disseminated in different settings and by others. 49. Formal and non-formal educational and cultural institutions (including archives,  libraries, museums, child and youth-led organisations, and other learning institutions) should be supported and encouraged to develop and make available a variety  of digital and interactive learning resources and to co-operate across institutional  boundaries to optimise learning opportunities in relation to the digital environment. 3.6. The right to protection and safety 50. Taking into account the development of new technologies, children have the  right to be protected from all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse in the digital environment. Any  protective measures should take into consideration the best  interests and evolving capacities of the child and not unduly restrict the exercise of  other rights. 51. There are a number of areas of concern for children’s healthy development and  well-being which may arise in connection with the digital environment, including  but not limited to, risks of harm from:  ►sexual exploitation and abuse, solicitation for sexual purposes (grooming),  online recruitment of children for the commission of criminal offences, for  participation in extremist political or religious movements or for trafficking  purposes (contact risks);
Page 20 ► Guidelines ►the degrading and stereotyped portrayal and over-sexualisation of women  and children in particular; the portrayal and glorification of violence and selfharm, in particular suicides; demeaning, discriminatory or racist expressions  or apologia for such conduct; advertising, adult content (content risks);  ►bullying, stalking and other forms of harassment, non-consensual dissemina tion of sexual images, extortion, hate speech, hacking, gambling, illegal down loading or other intellectual property infringements, commercial exploitation  (conduct risks);  ►excessive use, sleep deprivation and physical harm (health risks). All of the above factors are capable of adversely affecting the physical, emotional  and psychological well-being of a child. Measures to address risks in the digital environment 52. Being mindful of the speed at which new technologies can emerge, States  should take precautionary measures, including by assessing on a regular basis any  risks of harm that these may pose to children’s health, despite the absence of certainty  at that time with regard to scientific and technical knowledge of the existence or  extent of such risks. 53. States should promote and provide incentives to business enterprises to  implement safety by design, privacy by design and privacy by default as guiding  principles for products and services’ features and functionalities addressed to or  used by children. 54. Where States encourage the development, production and regular update by  business enterprises of parental controls to mitigate risks for children in the digital  environment, they should ensure that such controls are developed and deployed  taking into account children’s evolving capacities, and that they do not reinforce  discriminatory attitudes, infringe children’s right to privacy or deny children the  right to information, in accordance with their age and maturity. Protection and awareness-raising measures 55. Specific measures and policies should be adopted to protect infants from  premature exposure to the digital environment due to limited benefits with respect  to their particular physical, psychological, social and stimulation needs. 56. States should require the use of effective systems of age-verification to ensure  children are protected from products, services and content in the digital environment  which are legally restricted with reference to specific ages, using methods that are  consistent with the principles of data minimisation. 57. States should take measures to ensure that children are protected from commer cial exploitation in the digital environment, including exposure to age-inappropriate  forms of advertising and marketing. This includes ensuring that business enterprises  do not engage in unfair commercial practices towards children, requiring that digital advertising and marketing towards children is clearly distinguishable to them  as such, and requiring all relevant stakeholders to limit the processing of children’s  personal data for commercial purposes.
Appendix ► Page 2158. States are encouraged to co-operate with the media, with due respect for media  freedom, with educational institutions and other relevant stakeholders, to develop  awareness-raising programmes aimed at protecting children from harmful content  as well as preventing their involvement in illegal online activities. 59. States should take measures to encourage business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders to develop and implement policies that address cyberbullying,  harassment and incitement to hatred and violence in the digital environment. Such  policies should include clear information on unacceptable behaviour, reporting  mechanisms and meaningful support for children involved in such acts. 60. States should share good practices on ways to address risks in the digital envi ronment, in relation to both prevention and remedies. States should put in place  public awareness-raising measures about counselling, reporting and complaint  mechanisms. Measures regarding child sexual abuse material 61. Policing with respect to child sexual abuse material should be victim-focused  with the highest priority being given to identifying, locating, protecting and pro viding rehabilitative services to the child depicted in such materials. 62. States should continually monitor whether and how child sexual abuse mate rials are hosted within their jurisdiction and require law-enforcement authorities  to establish databases of “hashes” ,2 with a view to expediting actions to identify  and locate children subjected to sexual exploitation or abuse and apprehending  perpetrators. 63. States should engage with business enterprises to provide assistance, including  as appropriate technical support and equipment, to law-enforcement authorities  to support the identification of perpetrators of crimes against children and collect  evidence required for criminal proceedings. 64. Mindful of available technologies and without prejudice to the principles of  liability of internet intermediaries and their exemption from general monitoring  obligations, States should require business enterprises to take reasonable, pro portionate and effective measures to ensure that their networks or online services  are not misused for criminal or other unlawful purposes in ways which may harm  children, for example in relation to the production, distribution, provision of access  to, advertising of or storage of child sexual abuse material or other forms of online  child abuse. 65. States should require relevant business enterprises to apply hash lists with a  view to ensuring that their networks are not being misused to store or distribute  child sexual abuse images. 2.  “Hashes” are a unique digital finger print assigned to digital files, including those that represent  child sexual abuse material. Hashes enable the rapid analysis of large quantities of data, obviating  the need to examine potential images of child sexual abuse individually. Hashes do not represent  the image itself and cannot be reverse engineered to create child sexual abuse images.
Page 22 ► Guidelines66. States should require that business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders  take promptly all necessary steps to secure the availability of metadata concerning  any child sexual exploitation and abuse material found on local servers, make them  available to law-enforcement authorities, remove these materials and, pending their  removal, restrict access to such materials found on servers outside of their jurisdiction. 3.7. Remedies 67. Member States should ensure the effective implementation of their obligations  under Articles 6 and 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ETS No. 5),  and other international and European human rights instruments, to fulfil a child’s  right to an effective remedy when their human rights and fundamental freedoms  have been infringed in the digital environment. This entails the provision of available,  known, accessible, affordable, and child-friendly avenues through which children,  as well as their parents or legal representatives, may submit complaints and seek  remedies. Effective remedies can include, depending on the violation in question,  inquiry, explanation, reply, correction, proceedings, immediate removal of unlawful  content, apology, reinstatement, reconnection and compensation. 68. Children should be provided with information and advice about remedies avail able at domestic level in a manner adapted to their age and maturity, in a language  which they can understand and which is gender and culture sensitive. Mechanisms  and processes in place should ensure that access to remedies is speedy and childfriendly, and provides appropriate redress to children. 69. States should ensure that in all cases access to courts or judicial review of  administrative remedies and other procedures are available, in line with the principles  set out in the Guidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on  child-friendly justice (2010). 70. States should, where appropriate, also provide children and/or their parents or  legal representatives with non-judicial mechanisms, administrative or other means  to seek remedy, such as through ombudspersons for children and other national  human rights institutions and data-protection authorities. The availability, adequacy  and effectiveness of these mechanisms for handling cases of violations or abuses of  the rights of the child in the digital environment should be reviewed on a regular  basis. 71. States, as the primary responsible entity, should take appropriate steps to  protect children against human rights abuses within the digital environment by  business enterprises and to ensure that children have access to an effective remedy,  including by: a. implementing policies and measures to encourage business enterprises to  establish their own remedial and grievance mechanisms, in line with the effec tiveness criteria set out in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human  Rights, while ensuring that these mechanisms do not impede the child’s access  to the State-based judicial or non-judicial mechanisms; b. encouraging business enterprises to provide information which is accessible,  age-appropriate and available in the language of the child about how to intro duce complaints and seek redress through remedial and grievance mechanisms;
Appendix ► Page 23c. requiring that business enterprises make available, on their platform or within  their service, easily accessible ways for any person, and in particular children,  to report any material or activity which causes them concern and that reports  received are dealt with efficiently and within reasonable timescales. 4. National frameworks 4.1. Legal framework 72. Laws and policies related to the digital environment should be assessed, at  their drafting stage, with regard to the impact that their implementation may have  on children’s enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. States should  review at regular intervals, and, where necessary, update legal frameworks to sup port the full realisation of the rights of the child in the digital environment. 73. A comprehensive legal framework should provide for preventive and protective  measures in relation to the digital environment; provide support measures for parents  and carers; prohibit all forms of violence, exploitation and abuse; include effective  remedies, recovery and reintegration services; establish child and gender-sensitive  counselling, reporting and complaint mechanisms; encompass child-friendly mechanisms for consultation and participation; and set up accountability mechanisms to  fight impunity. 74. States should ensure that their legal frameworks encompass the full range of  unlawful acts which can be committed in the digital environment, where possible  formulated in a technology-neutral manner, leaving room for the emergence of new  technologies. Such frameworks should include definitions of offences, criminal, civil  or administrative liability and sanctions for natural and legal persons, and provisions  of services for children. Due account should be taken of relevant instruments, such  as the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual  Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201), the Convention on Cybercrime (ETS  No. 185) and the Optional Protocols to the United Nations Convention on the Rights  of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (2000)  and on a communications procedure (2011), which can serve as benchmarks for  criminal law reform and wider reform of legal frameworks and services and can  inform the development of an effective legislative framework. 75. Where forms of peer-to-peer online violence or abuse breaches occur, States  should, as far as possible, pursue suitable and adequate preventive and restorative  approaches, while preventing the criminalisation of children.  76. States should set up legal frameworks that apply to the processing of personal  data of children and regularly evaluate the overall effectiveness of such frameworks.  Due account should be taken of the relevant international and European instruments  which refer to data-protection principles and rights, such as the Convention for the  Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS  No. 108). 77. Legal frameworks in place should provide that independent data-protection  authorities are competent to address complaints made by children and/or their 
Page 24 ► Guidelinesparents or carers or legal representatives related to the unlawful processing of per sonal data of children and establish effective mechanisms which enable children  to seek rectification or erasure of their data if these have been processed contrary  to the provisions of domestic law or when children withdraw their consent. Upon  request, relevant public and private stakeholders should be obliged to expediently  remove or delete such content free of charge. 78. States should create a clear and predictable legal and regulatory environment  which helps businesses and other stakeholders meet their responsibility to respect  the rights of the child in the digital environment throughout their operations. 79. States should ensure that children or their legal representatives can seek  compensation from perpetrator(s) for violations of their rights and abuses. Where  appropriate, consideration should be given to the establishment of funds for the  compensation of child victims or measures or programmes aimed at providing  therapeutic or other support. Specific requirements for the registry for a country code top-level domain 80. When awarding a contract or licence to an entity to become the registry for a  country code top-level domain, States should include clear requirements to have  due regard to the best interests of children. Such requirements should cover, for  example, a clear prohibition by the registry of the registration or use of any domain  name which advertises or suggests that child sexual abuse material may be available  on any domain within the registry’s purview and the establishment by the registry  of mechanisms to ensure that this policy is enforced, including by registrars and  registrants. The same requirements should apply to the registration of generic toplevel domains. 81. Where a registrant proposes to establish or renew a site or service targeted  at children or used by children in substantial numbers within their country code  domain, States should ensure that the registry or other competent authority requires  registrants to put in place appropriate child-protection policies. This may include, for  example, requiring that neither the registrant nor anyone employed by the registrant  in connection with delivering the service or in managing any data generated by the  service has been convicted of acts of sexual exploitation or sexual abuse of children  or other relevant offences. 4.2. Policy and institutional frameworks Overall strategy and policy coherence 82. In order to achieve greater co-ordination and policy coherence across the full  range of the rights of the child in the digital environment, States should establish a  comprehensive strategic national approach, and ensure that policies and measures  are consistent and mutually reinforcing. This may include the adoption of a strategy  or action plan or the integration of specific attention to the rights of the child in the  digital environment into existing action plans, strategies and policies in a consolidated manner. 83. A comprehensive strategic national approach should identify competent bodies  with the responsibility and authority to implement the actions set out therein, contain 
Appendix ► Page 25realistic and time-specific targets, be supported by adequate human and financial  resources, and be based on current scientific knowledge, ongoing and sufficiently  resourced research and good practices. 84. States should engage all relevant stakeholders, such as ombudspersons for  children and other independent human rights institutions, education stakeholders,  data-protection authorities, business enterprises and civil society, including child  and youth-led organisations, in the design, drafting, implementation and evaluation  of a national strategy or action plan. In particular, States should ensure that children  are consulted and empowered to contribute to these processes, with their informed  consent and according to their evolving capacities. Due weight should be given to  children’s views. Children should be informed about how their views were taken into  account and how these views influenced the decision-making process. Adequate  resources should be made available to ensure children’s meaningful participation. 85. Methodologies should be developed to assess progress and evaluate actions  foreseen by the national strategy or action plan at all levels and by all stakeholders.  Evaluations should be conducted on a regular basis with a view to identifying policies and measures that are appropriate and effective in respecting, protecting and  fulfilling the rights of the child in the digital environment. 86. States should take appropriate measures to widely disseminate information  on adopted strategies or action plans and their implementation.  Sectoral policies 87. States should ensure that policies and initiatives are informed by rigorous and  up-to-date evidence about children’s experiences in the digital environment, in order  to map existing opportunities and risks for children, identify emerging trends and  guide the targeting of policy and resources to ensure children’s well-being in the  digital environment. 88. States should devise and implement policies that support educational, cultural  and other institutional providers of beneficial resources for children to make these  available to children, parents and carers in the digital environment. 89. States should strengthen regulatory agencies’ responsibility for drawing up,  implementing and enforcing standards and guidance relevant to the rights of the  child in the digital environment. 90. States should take measures, including the drafting of policies, operational  guidelines and/or codes of conduct, to build awareness and support among business  enterprises within their jurisdiction regarding their roles, responsibilities and impact  on the rights of the child, and their co-operation with relevant stakeholders. 91. States should devise, within the national framework for child protection, a  comprehensive protection and safety policy within which the digital environment  is expressly addressed and to which all relevant stakeholders contribute, including  children. Such a policy should take into account existing standards and guidance, 
Page 26 ► Guidelinessuch as the Council of Europe Policy Guidelines on integrated national strategies  for the protection of children from violence (2009).3 92. States should put in place strategies to prevent their citizens’ access to child  sexual abuse material physically located in other jurisdictions, according to their  own legislation or a set of internationally recognised criteria. 93. States should engage business enterprises and other relevant stakeholders  in the implementation of their sectoral policies, notably the protection and safety  policy framework and related awareness-raising measures. Addressing the risks and impact for the rights of the child 94. States should require business enterprises and other stakeholders to undertake  due diligence in order to identify, prevent and mitigate their impact on the rights of  the child in the digital environment. 95.  States should require business enterprises to perform regular child-rights  risk assessments in relation to digital technologies, products, services and policies  and to demonstrate that they are taking reasonable and proportionate measures  to manage and mitigate such risks. 96. States should encourage business enterprises to develop, apply and regularly  review and evaluate child-oriented industry policies, standards and codes of conduct  to maximise opportunities and address risks in the digital environment. 97. Recognising that parents, carers and others may rely on an online service’s  stated terms and conditions of service as a guide to the suitability of that service  for their child, being mindful of available technologies and without prejudice to the  liability of internet intermediaries, States should require business enterprises to take  reasonable, proportionate and effective measures to ensure that their terms and  conditions of service are enforced. Institutional aspects, mechanisms and services 98. States should ensure that institutions responsible for guaranteeing human  and children’s rights address within their mandate the rights of the child in relation  to the digital environment, for example through the promotion of digital literacy  skills, high-quality standards for the production of digital content and services of  social, educational and cultural benefit to children and child-friendly mechanisms  for consultation and participation. 99. States should ensure that there are institutions or mechanisms responsible to  receive, investigate and address complaints from children and their parents or legal  representatives about human rights violations or abuses in relation to the digital  environment, employing child-sensitive procedures that ensure the child’s right to  privacy throughout and provide for monitoring and follow-up. 100. Competent authorities should establish accessible, safe, confidential, age-ap propriate and gender-sensitive counselling, reporting and complaint mechanisms,  3.  Recommendation CM/Rec(2009)10 of the Committee of Ministers to member States on integrated  national strategies for the protection of children from violence, Appendix 1. 
Appendix ► Page 27for example through public bodies, hotlines, helplines and zero-rate chat applications managed by child helplines, and online platforms, as a core dimension of the  national child-protection system, with appropriate links to child support services  and law-enforcement authorities, and, where appropriate, in close co-operation with  external stakeholders. This should include the provision of safe, child-friendly, freeof-charge points of contact for children to report violence, exploitation and abuse  in the digital environment to the relevant authorities. Such mechanisms should  ensure the child or their parents’ or legal representatives’ right to confidentiality and  anonymity. 101. States should encourage telecommunications companies to waive costs for  incoming calls to child helplines by means of toll-free telephone numbers. 102. States should ensure there is an effective mechanism to allow any person to  report anonymously the existence of suspected illegal material online, in particular  child sexual abuse material. 103.  States should, as part of the child-protection system, ensure access to and  provide adequate and gender-sensitive support services and assistance for children  whose rights and privacy have been violated or who have been subjected to violence,  sexual exploitation or abuse in the digital environment, including services to ensure  the child’s physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration, and prevent  their re-victimisation. 104.  States should ensure that appropriate sex-offender treatment programmes are  available for persons convicted of sexual offences involving children in the digital  environment, and that services are made available to anyone concerned about the  possibility of their committing a sexual crime involving a child, including in the  digital environment. Investment, resources and training 105. States should invest in hardware, software, connectivity, adequate bandwidth  and teacher training in schools to support learning. 106.  States should ensure that initial and in-service training informs and empowers  educators so that they can support children in acquiring the skills and literacy needed  to exercise their rights in the digital environment. 107.  States should ensure that policies and measures provide educational institutions  with the resources, training and support needed to take preventive and protective  measures concerning children, including in school, against violence and abuses  of digital media, in ways that prevent escalation, provide appropriate support to  children affected by and involved in such acts, provide redress and build resilience. 108.  States should take measures to ensure that adequate arrangements are in place  to implement screening processes and to provide guidance, advice and assistance  to any agency or employer who recruits staff or volunteers to work with children,  including within the digital environment, in order to prevent and reduce the risk  of individuals with a criminal record being recruited or placed in a position of trust  vis-à-vis children.
Page 28 ► Guidelines109. States should allocate adequate resources and provide initial and continuous  training for law-enforcement staff, members of the judiciary and professionals work ing with and for children. Such training should enhance their skills and knowledge  of the rights of the child in the digital environment, the risks children face online,  how to recognise the signals that a child may be a victim of online harm, violence,  abuse and exploitation and what steps to take in response. 110. States should invest in research and knowledge development, including child  and youth participation in the field of the rights of the child in the digital envi ronment. Research should be conducted independently of relevant interests and  should be sufficiently detailed to differentiate children’s experiences by age, sex,  socio-economic status and other factors that render children vulnerable or resilient  in the digital environment. 4.3. Co-operation and co-ordination at national level 111.  States should pursue a comprehensive strategic and co-ordinated multistakeholder approach informing and engaging all relevant stakeholders, including  national, regional and local law-enforcement and other authorities, educational and  social-service agencies, independent human rights institutions, data-protection  authorities, professionals working for and with children, civil society, including child  and youth-led organisations, business enterprises, industry associations, researchers,  families and children, in ways which are tailored to their roles and functions. 112. States should designate an authority or create a co-ordinating mechanism to  assess developments in the digital environment that might impact the rights of the  child and which includes children in its decision-making processes, and ensure that  their national policies adequately address such developments. 113.   States should set up co-operation frameworks, procedures and processes  between competent State authorities, independent authorities, civil society and  business enterprises, taking into account their respective roles and responsibilities,  capacities and resources. 114.  States should require platforms or providers of communication services to  take prompt and effective action in response to complaints of peer-to-peer or other  online violence or abuse and to co-operate with national authorities. 115. States should engage business enterprises, such as internet service providers  and social network providers, to play an active role in preventing and deleting illegal  content, as determined by law or by a judicial or other competent authority. 116. States should encourage civil society stakeholders, as key catalysts in promot ing the human rights dimension of the digital environment, to actively monitor,  evaluate and promote children’s skills, well-being and related information literacy  and training initiatives, including actions undertaken by other stakeholders, and to  disseminate their findings and results. 117.  States should encourage all professional media outlets, and public service media  in particular, to be attentive to their role as an important source of information and  reference for children, parents or carers, and educators in relation to the rights of  the child in the digital environment, with due regard to international and European  standar ds on freedom of expression and information and freedom of the media.
Appendix ► Page 295. International co-operation and co-ordination 118.  States should be encouraged to ratify and implement international instru ments relevant to the promotion and protection of the rights of the child in the  digital environment. Such instruments include, inter alia: the Optional Protocols to  the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children,  child prostitution and child pornography (2000), and on a communications proce dure (2011), the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with  regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data (ETS No. 108), the Convention on  Cybercrime (ETS No. 185) and its Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation  of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS  No. 189), the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human  Beings (CETS No. 197) and the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of  Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS No. 201). 119. States should co-operate with each other by applying relevant international  and regional instruments and arrangements, to the widest extent possible, for the  purpose of respecting, protecting and fulfilling the rights of the child in the digital  environment. In particular, they should: a. have an adequate legal basis for providing assistance and, where appropriate,  should have in place treaties, arrangements or other mechanisms to enable  efficient co-operation with other States; b. ensure that their competent authorities can rapidly, constructively and effec tively use clear channels or mechanisms for the effective transmission and  execution of requests for information and other types of assistance; c. have clear and efficient processes for the prioritisation and timely execution  of requests; d. not prohibit or place unreasonable or unduly restrictive conditions on the  provision of assistance or co-operation. 120. States should support regional and international capacity-building efforts to  improve policy and operational measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of  the child in the digital environment, including the pooling and sharing of successful  education and awareness-raising tools. 121.  States should co-operate with a view to promoting standardisation of content  classification and advisory labels among countries and across stakeholder groups  to define what is appropriate and what is inappropriate for children. 122. States should expedite action to ensure that their law-enforcement agencies  can connect to the INTERPOL database that deals with child sexual abuse material. 123.  Recognising its wider role in relation to the management of the internet,  States should actively engage with the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names  and Numbers (ICANN) to press for the effective implementation of policies which  will enhance or sustain the rights of the child, in particular by ensuring that web  addresses which self-evidently advertise or promote child sexual abuse material or  any other offences against children are identified and removed, or not authorised  to be registered.
Page 30 ► Guidelines124.  To facilitate implementation of these guidelines, member States should  strengthen co-operation within relevant intergovernmental bodies, transnational  networks and other international organisations.



The Council of Europe is the continent’s leading human  rights organisation. It comprises 47 member states, 28 of  which are members of the European Union. All Council of  Europe member states have signed up to the European  Convention on Human Rights, a treaty designed to  protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law.  The European Court of Human Rights oversees the  implementation of the Convention in the member states. www.coe.intThe guidelines to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the child in the  digital environment were adopted by the Committee of Ministers of the  Council of Europe on 4 July 2018.  This publication contains the recommendations, addressed to all member  states of the Council of Europe, followed by useful, thematically directed  sections to guide states on fundamental principles and rights, operational  principles and measures to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of the  child in the digital environment, national frameworks and international  co-operation and co-ordination. The purpose of the guidelines is to assist states and other relevant  stakeholders in their efforts to adopt a comprehensive, strategic approach in  building and containing the often complex world of the digital environment.  Ensuring children’s interaction and safety in this environment is paramount.  Among the many topics covered are the protection of personal data,  provision of child-friendly content adapted to their evolving capacities,  helplines and hotlines, vulnerability and resilience, as well as the role and  responsibilities of business enterprises. In addition, the guidelines call upon  states to engage with children, including in decision-making processes,  to ensure that national policies adequately address developments in the  digital environment. These guidelines are of interest to a very wide audience, ranging from  national authority bodies, professionals, civil society, business and industry  sectors, to families and children themselves. Guidelines to respect,   protect and fulfil the   rights of the child in the  digital environment Building a Europe  for and with childrenwww.coe.int/childrenENG Prems 101818
