HELSINKI, 26-27 February 2019       Governing the Game Changer – Impacts of artificial intelligence development  on human rights, democracy and the rule of law     CONCLUSIONS  FROM THE CONFERENCE     Information processing technology and machine learning tools rationalise services and  deliver enormous efficiency gains in task and systems performance  in a wide range of public  and private fields. Increasing numbers of people reap many of the benefits of artificial  intelligence (AI), as new tools for communication, news consumption, education,  entertainment, commercial transactions and multiple other facets of daily life, are  fundamentally transforming societies .   Technological advancement can enhance human development and contribute to creating  optimal conditions f or the exercise of human rights . At the same time, there are broader  implications from its use, and possible misuse, for the core values  of democratic societies,  including equality  and fairne ss.   The following guidance for the way forward to ensure that AI development occurs safely and  for the benefit of all is inspired by the conference’s open, inclusive, inter -disciplinary and  multi-stakeholder debate :  1. AI impact s, positively and negatively , on the exercise of human rights, the functioning of  democratic societies, and the rule of law.  It require s timely and thoughtful policy  responses and must be placed at the top of governments’ political agendas ;  2. AI holds significant potential for economic growth and innovation. These goals are  essentially rooted in the shared  values of democratic societ ies. T he economic benefits  deriving from AI cannot be realised without duly respecting these values ;  3. AI affects all aspects of human life globally and transversally . All states and all  stakeholder groups  are therefore required  to coordinate efforts  and, inter alia , share  information and good practices , and  proactive ly develop  synergies ;   4. AI should be developed in a human -centric manner to produce benefits for individuals  and for societies. A transparent and accountable assessment of the appropriateness of  its application in a specific context, its benefits and risks , should be incorporated  throughout the life -cycle of development ;  5. It is important to develop a clearer understanding of AI and its impacts on human rights,  democracy and the rule of law. This requires investment in inter -disciplinary and  independent research into its direct and indirect effects on individuals and societies  in  concrete contexts ; 
HELSINKI, 26-27 February 2019       6. Effective supervisory mechanisms and democratic oversight structures regarding the  design, development and deployment of AI must be in place ;  7. Functioning democratic processes require an in dependently informed public, and the  encouragement of open and inclusive debates . Public awareness of the potential risks  and benefits of AI must be enhanced  and necessary new competencies and skills  developed . Due public trust in the information environme nt and AI applications must be  fostered ;  8. Human rights are the core value of democratic societies, their protection and promotion  requires active engagement from all actors , paying particular attention to the needs of  vulnerable groups who may face marginalisation . Effective and legitimate mechanisms to  prevent human rights violations and  thwart discrimination, inequality and bias are  necessary;   9. The design, development and deployment of AI tools  must be  subject to risk assessment   in line with applica ble principles . All automated processes  should be designed to make  them scrutin isable to a human reviewer. Effective remedies must be in place within  public and private remits in all cases where human rights violations are alleged.  Algorithmic transparency  is crucial  for building trust  and ensuring due rights protection ;  10. Equality before the law should not be compromised by algorithmic calculation. AI tools  can support t rained judges , while  the content and contours of the laws and the legal  systems of  democratic societies must remain authoritatively governed by  human s;   11. Existing landmark international instruments, including the Univer sal Declaration of  Human Rights  and the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental Freedoms , are applicable irrespective of contextual changes brought about  by AI  and must be complied with to ensure that technological progress occurs in line  with the principles of human rights, democracy and the rule of law . Ethical guidelines  and self -regulation  constitute additional tools to promote these values ;   12. All relevant stakeholder s should engage in in-depth exploration and research into the  impacts of AI on human rights, democracy and the rule of law . The Council of Europe , in  a multi -stakeholder approach , should continue to  develop sector -specific  recommenda tions, guidelines  and codes of conduct  to promote  human rights and the  viability of democratic institution s and processes. I t should monitor the impact of AI on  the collective foundations of democratic societies, continue to identify possible gaps in   applicability and enforceability of existing regulatory framework s, and on this basis,  assess the need for further measures  to ensure human rights compliant development ,  design and deployment  of AI. 
