THINK  BEFORE YOU PRINTContents
  Determine the need to perform an AIIA 1. Is the AI used in a new (social) domain? 2. Is a new form of AI technology used? 3. Does the AI have a high degree of autonomy? 4. Is the AI used in a complex environment? 5. Are sensitive personal data used? 6. Does the AI make decisions that have a serious impact on   persons or entities or have legal consequences for them? 7. Does the AI make complex decisions?Step 1   Describe the AI application 1. Describe the application and the goal of the application 2. Describe which AI technology is used to achieve the goal 3. Describe which data is used in the context of the application 4. Describe which actors play a role in the applicationStep 2 Describe the benefits of the   AI application 1. What are the benefits for the organisation? 2. What are the benefits for the individual? 3. What are the benefits for society as a whole?Step 3Is the application reliable, safe   and transparent? 1. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the reliability   of the acting of the AI? 2. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the safety of the AI? 3. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the transparency   of the acting of the AI?Step 5Considerations and assessment Step 6Review periodically Stap 7Step 8 Documentation and accountability Step 7 Are the goal and the way the goal is  reached ethical and legally justifiable? 1. Which actors are involved in and/or are affected by my AI application? 2. Have these values and interests been laid down in laws and  regulations? 3. Which values and interests play a role in the context of my   deployment of AI?Step 4  Roadmap for conducting the AIIA Organisations who want to conduct the AIIA can follow the roadmap below.  An explanation to this plan can be found in ‘Part 2: Conducting the AIIA’,   page 35 .
  Colofon 2018 © ECP | Platform for the  Information Society With thanks to Turnaround  CommunicationContents Foreword  7 Introduction 13 Need for AIIA 14 Definition of Artificial Intelligence 14 For whom is the Impact Assessment? 15 How does the roadmap look like? 17 Interdisciplinary questions and starting points 19 Updating AIIA 19 Social questions 19 Ethical considerations 20 Transparency 22 Part 1 - Background Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 25 Ethical and legal assessment 27 The design stage 29 Involving Stakeholders 29 Relation Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) 30 Practical application AIIA and ethics 30 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 35 Step 1 Determine the need to perform an AIIA 39 Step 2 Describe the AI application 42 Step 3 Describe the benefits of the AI application 46 Step 4 Are the goal and the way the goal is reached ethical    and legally justifiable? 48 Step 5 Is the application reliable, safe and transparent? 51 Step 6 Considerations and assessment 57 Step 7 Documentation and accountability 59 Step 8 Assess periodically 60 Bibliography 63 Annex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 67 Annex 2 - AIIA roadmap 83
 7 Foreword The public debate around AI has developed rapidly. Apart from the  potential benefits of AI, there is a fast growing focus on threats and risks  (transparency, privacy, autonomy, cyber security et cetera) requiring  a careful approach. Examples from the recent past (smart meters, ovchipkaart (the smart card for public transport)) show that the introduction  of IT applications is not insensitive to the debate about legality and  ethics. This also applies to the deployment of AI. Mapping and addressing  the impact of AI in advance helps to achieve a smooth and responsible  introduction of AI in society.   What are the relevant legal and ethical questions   for our organisation if we decide to use AI?
 9 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment The AIIA helps to answer this question and is your guide in finding the  right framework of standards and deciding on the relevant trade-offs.  The “Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct” is the starting point for this  impact assessment and is an integral part of the AIIA. The code of conduct  is attached to this document as annex 1. The code of conduct offers a set  of rules and starting points that are generally relevant to the use of AI.  As both the concept of “AI” and the field of use are very broad, the code  of conduct is a starting point for the development of the right legal and  ethical framework that can be used for assessment. The nature of the AI application and the context in which it is used, define  to a great extent which trade-offs must be made in a specific case. For  instance, AI applications in the medical sector will partly lead to different  questions and areas of concern than AI applications in logistics. The AIIA offers concrete steps to help you to understand the relevant legal  and ethical standards and considerations when making decisions on the  use of AI applications. AIIA also offers a framework to engage in a dialogue  with stakeholders in and outside your organisation. This way, the AIIA  facilitates the debate about the deployment of AI.“Artificial Intelligence is not a revolution. It is a development that slowly enters our  society and evolves into a building block for digital society. By consistently separating  hype from reality, trying to read and connect parties and monitoring the balance  between options, ethics and legal protection, we will benefit more and more from AI.” — Daniël Frijters,   MT member and project advisor at ECP | Platform for the Information SocietyAI Impact Assessment as a helping hand  The AIIA is not intended to measure an organisation's deployment of AI.  Organisations remain responsible for the choices they make regarding  the use of AI. Performing the AIIA is not compulsory and it is not another  administrative burden. To the contrary; the AIIA is a support in the use of  AI. Indeed, responsible deployment of AI reduces the risks and costs, and  helps the user and the society to make progress (win-win). The AIIA primarily focuses on organisations who want to deploy AI in their  business operations, but it can also be used by developers of AI to test  applications. We hope that the AIIA will find its way to practice and that it will constitute  an effective contribution to the socially responsible introduction of AI in  the society. Prof. dr. Kees Stuurman Chairman ECP Working Group   AI Code of ConductDaniël Frijters MT member and project   advisor ECP Drs. Jelle Attema SecretaryMr. dr. Bart W. Schermer  Working group member   and CKO Considerati“AI offers many opportunities, but also leads to serious challenges in the area of  law and ethics. It is only possible to find solutions with sufficient support if there  is agreement. The code of conduct developed by ECP and the associated AI Impact  Assessment are important tools to engage in a dialogue about concrete uses. This  helps to develop and implement AI in society in a responsible way.”  — Prof. dr. Kees Stuurman, Chairman of the ECP AI Code of Conduct working group
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentThe working group “Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment” consisted of  (in a personal capacity): Kees Stuurman (chairman) Van Doorne advocaten, Tilburg University •   Bart Schermer Considerati, Leiden University • Daniël Frijters   ECP | Platform for the Information Society • Frances Brazier   Technical University Delft • Jaap van den Herik Leiden University •   Joost Heurkens IBM • Leon Kester TNO • Maarten de Schipper  Xomnia • Sandra van der Weide Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate  Policy • Jelle Attema (secretary) ECP | latform for the  Information Society. The following persons and organisations have made useful comments on  the draft version (in a personal capacity): Femke Polman en Roxane Daniels VNG, Data Science Hub • Staff of the  Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations , department Information  society of the management board of Information Society and Government • Marc Welters NOREA, EY • Marijn Markus, Reinoud  Kaasschieter en Martijn van de Ridder CAP GEMINI • Rob Nijman  IBM • Stefan Leijnen Asimov Institute. Considerati, on directions of ECP, made a considerable contribution to the  preparation of the AI Impact Assessment. We thank in particular Joas van Ham, Bendert Zevenbergen and Bart Schermer for their efforts.
Introduction 13 Introduction The Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment (AIIA) build on the Guidelines  for rules of conduct of Autonomous Systems (“Handreiking voor gedrags regels Autonome Systemen” (ECP.NL, 2006)), which focused on the legal  aspects of the deployment of autonomous systems: systems that perform  acts with legal consequences. The guidelines were written by a group  of various experts: lawyers, business scientists and technicians, from  science, industry and government. The initiative for the guidelines comes  from ECP. The guidelines at that time were created at the request of ECP  participants, from industry and government, because of the seemingly rap id expansion of autonomous systems at the time, and for so-called “auton omous agents”. In 2006, the Guidelines focused mainly on the legal aspects.The AIIA is  broader and now also includes the ethical aspects: a broadly shared opin ion in the working group (still consisting for the greater part of the same  organisations and people as in 2006) is that AI must improve wellbeing  and must not only respect, but also promote human values.
Introduction 15 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment “Autonomous and/or intelligent systems (AI/S) are systems that   are able to reason, decide, form intentions and perform actions   based on defined principles.” The IEEE has taken the initiative to ask more than two hundred experts  and scientists around the world to think about the ethical aspects of autonomous and intelligent systems. Working  groups have been created for the various aspects, to define standards and  rules of conduct. The document reflects the consensus among a broad  group of experts from many parts of the world and cultures. Core elements from the approach of the IEEE, and also the AIIA, is that  applying AI in an ethical way means that AI must contribute to the wellbeing of people and the planet. The IEEE follows the operationalisation  of the OECD of well-being (OECD, 2018). This covers many topics such  as human rights, economic objectives, education and health, as well  as subjective aspects of well-being. What "contributing to well-being"  means for a specific project, requires the analysis and balancing of  often many (sometimes contradictory) requirements with a view to the  specific cultural context. The AIIA offers the “Artificial Intelligence Code of  Conduct” (Annex 1) as a starting point for that analysis. The third aspect  that the IEEE emphasizes is that the user of AI is responsible for the  impact of AI and must set up processes to realise the positive effects and  prevent and control the negative effects. For whom is the Impact Assessment? The Impact Assessment is for organisations who want to use AI in  their (service) processes and want to analyse the legal and ethical  consequences. At the design stage (where expensive errors can be  prevented), but also during the use: organisations will often want to see  the consequences of their service. Carrying out the Impact Assessment  is a lot of work, however, a part can be reused because an important part Need for AIIA As the interest for AI is highly fluctuating, it is legitimate to wonder if and  why an Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment is necessary. The most important reason is, that AI takes more and more tasks over  from people or carries tasks out together with people, whereby the  notice of ethics of people has a leading role: in education, care, in the  context of work and income and in public bodies. In addition, thanks to  AI, organisations can assume new roles, where ethics play a role. For  instance in the prevention, control and detection of fraud. Many of these examples of autonomy and intelligence are not very  spectacular, but may nevertheless have a great impact on those who get  to deal with these systems. The AIIA is useful in AI applications that perform acts or make decisions,  together with people or not, that used to be done by people and where  ethical questions play a role. The Impact Assessment is also relevant if  an organisation pursues new goals or performs activities that are made  possible by AI and where questions of well-being, human values and legal  frameworks are relevant. The value of the AIIA is not dependent on the degree of autonomy or  intelligence of ICT. Even if rapid developments in the area of AI make this  question more concrete and more urgent. Definition of Artificial Intelligence There is little agreement on the definition of Artificial Intelligence (AI). 1  The AIIA follows the description and approach of the IEEE (The IEEE Global  Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems, 2017). 
1 2Introduction 17 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment for the design of the technology, for the organisation or the organisation  that applies technology, for the administrators who have to account  for it, the professionals and specialists working with the technology or  delegating tasks to it, for the end users who experience the consequences,  and for society How does the roadmap look like? Whether it is useful to conduct the Impact Assessment often depends on the combination of service, organisation, end users and society. Step 1  of the Impact Assessment consists of a number of screening  questions to answer the question whether it is useful to carry out the  assessment. These questions relate to:  1. the social and political context of the application (experience with  technology in this domain, the technology touches on sensitive issues), 2. characteristics of the technology itself (autonomy, complexity,  comprehensibility, predictability), 3. and the processes of which the technology is part (complexity of the  environment and decision-making, transparency, comprehensibility  and predictability of the outcomes, the impact for people). With one or more positive answers to the screening questions, it may  be useful to carry out the Impact Assessment. The Impact Assessment then starts with step 2 , the description of the  project: the goals that are pursued by using AI, the data that are used,   the actors such as the end users and other stakeholders. Think also of the  professionals in an organisation who have to work with AI or who transfer  work to AI.of the ethical and legal starting points will be generic for a particular  technology, for a specific sector or a certain profession. The organisation that wants to apply AI, conducts the Impact Assessment.  Technology should function within the legal and ethical frameworks of the  organisation deploying AI, within the frameworks of the professionals who  work with AI or transfer parts of their work to technology, end users and  society. The outcomes of the Impact Assessment sometimes lead to certain  demands on the technology (specific features), organisational measures  (for example a fall-back when end users want human contact, or new task  distributions to prevent and deal with incidents), further education and  training (how does a doctor, accountant, lawyer or civil servant bear his  professional responsibility when tasks are performed by AI; how does  a professional interpret the advice of AI, what are the weaknesses and  strengths of this advice and how do they come about) and the gathering   of data on the exact results in practice. The provider and producer of the AI solution must ensure that a number of  technical preconditions are met (for example, integrity of data, safety and  continuity), but must also offer facilities allowing the organisation deploying  the AI to take responsibility and to be transparent about the consequences.  The provider of the technology can use the Impact Assessment to help  organisations ask the right questions and make trade-offs. The starting point of this Impact Assessment is that the organisation  deploying AI takes responsibility for AI. This is fundamental for the working group: the black scenarios  surrounding AI are usually about technology in which the ethical  frameworks are set by an external party (perhaps the manufacturer, a  malicious person or the technology itself). Based on general principles and starting points in hand, this assessment  helps to examine what these principles mean for a specific application: 
5 8 6 7 4 3 Introduction 19 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Interdisciplinary questions and starting points The Impact Assessment and the Code of Conduct have been fleshed out by  a broadly selected group of experts. An important challenge was bridging  the different perspectives. A lawyer looks at ethics differently than a  provider of these systems, an engineer, an official or an IT auditor. The  Impact Assessment and the Code of Conduct have attempted to formulate  common questions and starting points that address various disciplines  from their own perspective and expertise. The guidelines do not make  those discipline-specific analyses superfluous. Updating AIIA The Impact Assessment and the Code of Conduct have been adopted  according to the insights of today. However, expectations, roles, norms and  values change under the influence of the public debate and experiences  with new technology. This changes the content of professions and the  criteria on which professionals are assessed. The expectations of end  users also change when certain technologies become commonplace. It is  difficult if not impossible to foresee these changes; that is why planning  new assessments and collecting data on the impact of technology are  important elements in the Impact Assessment. And this is always done  against the current state of affairs in the field of applicable (legal) rules  and the public debate. Social questions The Impact Assessment examines the consequences of using AI in  organisations. It does not give an answer to many issues surrounding  new technology: for example, what automation and robotisation does  with the content of work and employment, or what AI means for market  relations. Issues such as interoperability of datasets and data control are  not addressed. The public and political debate on these issues is very  important for the requirements that AI must meet. Readers who want to The goals of the project are formulated in step 3 , not only at the level of  the end user, who experiences the consequences of the service, but also  at the level of the organisation offering the service and of the society. This  broad approach to goals is important, because ethical and legal aspects  are at stake that relate to the relationship between an organisation and its  environment. Step 4  addresses the ethical and legal aspects of the application. In this  step, the relevant ethical and legal frameworks are mapped and applied  to the application. There are many relevant sources for ethical and legal  frameworks for an application: some are formal (laws, decisions), others  more informal: codes of conduct, covenants or professional codes.  In step 5 organisations make strategic and operational choices with an  ethical component: how they want to carry out their activities in relation to  their customers, employees, suppliers, competitors and the society. The different facets related to ethical and legal aspects, are weighted in  step 6 . In this step, decisions are made about the deployment of AI.  These steps are concluded by step 7 : proper documentation of the  previous steps and justification of decisions taken,  and by step 8 : monitoring and evaluating the impact of AI. As the  deployment of AI will often lead to changes in the way that ethical and  legal aspects are looked at, this will often be the subject of that evaluation.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentIntroduction 21 "Self-learning" means that these systems must be able to make mistakes.  And that they sometimes perform tasks in new ways, incomprehensible  and unpredictable for people. Issues such as control, transparency and  accountability are crucial themes in these self-learning systems: how can  we control a system that is better than us, without understanding how.  Sometimes this may mean that systems cannot be applied: for example in  the domain of the government, where being able to explain a government  decision in clear language is a right of citizens. The Impact Assessment assumes that control, accountability and  transparency do not always have to be part of the system. If a system is better than people, other measures are needed so that  people can exercise control and are accountable. For example, by not  allowing a system to "learn" when performing tasks. Or by having  a system perform actions only within specific (ethical) boundaries,  formulated by the organisation using the systems. A third consideration is that most AI does not work independently: it is  part of a service or a product. And AI often works together with or advises  people. For example, a web shop based on AI can customize product  offerings for a visitor, determine the price, test if the information the  visitor provides about address and payment data is reliable and predict  when the package is probably delivered at home. Each of these forms of  AI has different ethical and legal aspects. But ethical questions can also  be asked about the entire web shop, such as: does the shop help visitors  to make sustainable choices or does it focus on temptation and impulse  purchases (or does it combine both principles). In that case, the Impact  Assessment concerns the entire service and the individual components.get an idea of these aspects are recommended to read publications such  as "Upgrading" (Rathenau Institute) or "Man and Technology" (SER). 2 Ethical considerations The Impact Assessment assumes that ethical questions do not only play a  role in forms of AI that are not yet possible: the current (simple forms of)  AI and much older ICT systems already raise ethical questions. An important distinction between ethics and AI is the distinction between  Artificial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) and Artificial General Intelligence  (AGI): the aim of AGI is to have machines perform intellectual tasks just  as well as people. To achieve this, these systems need information about  what they can do, what their limitations are, what goals they have to  strive after and which strategy fits. Often, this information is called "selfconsciousness". The difference between AGI and ANI is that ANI carries out intellectual  tasks in a limited domain. Ethical principles also apply, but not exclusively,  to systems with ANI or AGI. An important design principle is that people  using ANI or AGI must be able to exercise control: to set the ethical  frameworks within which the systems act. Organisations are not used  to making ethical frameworks explicit and might leave this easily to the  designers of systems.  An objective of the Impact Assessment is that organisations define  their ethical frameworks themselves. A second important distinction between ethics and AI is that many systems  classified as "AI" are no longer "pre-programmed" like the ICT systems  we know, but are self-learning and adjust their actions and judgment. The  classical systems had more computing power than their creators, but  they could not be smarter than their inventors. The self-learning systems  can ultimately make decisions or perform tasks better than "creators". 
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentTransparency Transparency about how an AI application works gives individuals the  opportunity to appreciate the effects of the application on the freedom of  action and the room to make decisions. Transparency means that actors have knowledge of the fact that AI is  applied, how decision-making takes place and what consequences this  may have for them. In practice, this can mean various things. It may mean that there is access  to the source code of an AI application, that end-users are involved  to a certain extent in the design process of the application, or that an  explanation is provided in general terms about the operation and the  context of the AI application. Transparency about the use of AI applications  may enlarge the individual's autonomy, because it gives the individual the  opportunity to relate to, for instance, an automatically made decision. When it comes to transparency, it is important to remember that services  (but also products such as the self-driving car) are often made up of  countless components. Some of these components can be called AI.  Many of these components are not under the direct management of the  organisation that offers the service: public bodies use each other's data;  self-driving cars rely on data from road managers, other cars on the road  and providers of navigation systems. Often these services will use data  from a variety of data sources that change continuously. In many cases  it is no longer clear which data played a role at the time of a decision.  The question then is which knowledge and organisational measures are  necessary to be able to take responsibility and to prevent undesirable  consequences and repetition: sometimes algorithmic transparency can be  important. The starting point of the Impact Assessment is that with every deployment  of AI, we look at what is required for transparency and what that means  for the design of the technique, the organisation or the people working  with the technology.
Part 1 - Background Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 25 Part 1 - Background   Artificial Intelligence   Impact Assessment (AIIA) An Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment (hereafter: AIIA or Impact  Assessment) is a structured method to:   1. Map the (public) benefits of an AI application. 2. Analyse the reliability, safety and transparency of AI applications. 3. Identify values and interests that are concerned by the deployment   of AI. 3 4. Identify and limit risks of the deployment of AI. 5. Account for the choices that have been made in the weighting of   values and interests.
1Part 1 - Background Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 27 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Ethical and legal assessment The performance of an AIIA must result in an ethical and legally justifiable  deployment of AI. For an AI application to be ethical and legally justifiable,  two conditions must be met: Is the deployment of AI reliable,  safe and transparent? Reliability, safety and transparency are required prerequisites for a safe  use of AI. If an AI does not work properly or is unsafe, it will not be easy  to justify its use (regardless of the concrete goal). So these are generic  conditions an AI application always has to comply with. Reliable Reliability refers to the systematically correct operation of the system:  does it work efficiently and are the results technically and statistically  correct. In other words, does the AI application do what it has to do and  are the outcomes of the system correct and is it possible to reconstruct  where necessary how the AI has come to a decision? Safe Safety of AI plays a role at various levels. Above all, the AI must not pose  an (unacceptable) danger to the environment. This is particularly the case  when it comes to AI systems that are situated in the physical world (think,  for example, of self-driving cars). In addition, an AI application, being an  information processing system, must be safe itself (digital security).This  means that the integrity, confidentiality and availability of the system  and the data it uses must be guaranteed. This is not only to protect the  operation of the AI application, but also to protect the rights of (end) users,  such as the right to privacy and data protection.Conducting an AIIA results in an ethical and legally justifiable deployment  of AI. By thinking at an early stage about the opportunities and risks,  problems are prevented. This not only ensures that the deployment of   AI is justified; it also helps to protect the reputation and investments of   the user. 4 There is no statutory obligation to conduct an AIIA. The AIIA is a selfregulating instrument with which an organisation comes to a socially  responsible deployment of AI.
2 Part 1 - Background Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 29 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Context The context is also relevant, for instance within a sector. E.g. in the context  of health care,  the Law on the professions in individual health care, the Law on the  medical treatment agreement and the Law on medical devices are  relevant. In addition, numerous guidelines and codes of conduct apply.  These laws, rules and codes of conduct form the framework in which the  AI application must operate in any case. Moral compass However, legal does not necessarily mean that an application is also  ethical. In case of more advanced forms and applications of AI, the legal  framework will often not be clear or concrete yet. It is then up to the  organisation to make choices based on its own  moral compass. The "Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct" can help to  define this compass (see annex 1). The design stage An AIIA is conducted at the beginning of a project in which AI techniques  are applied. In this way, the ethical considerations can be included in the  design of the application ( value based design or value aligned design ).  This also makes sense in terms of costs and feasibility, because if a  product has already been built or a project has already been executed,   it is often impossible or very expensive to make any changes. Involving Stakeholders In addition to the internal stakeholders (the business or the policies,  legal, compliance, IT, etc.), the involvement of the outside world is also  relevant. The discussion with stakeholders (politics, government, civil  society, science) and in particular end users who are affected by the  deployment of AI (citizens, patients, consumers, employees, etc.) and their  representatives is essential to gain support for the results of the AIIA. Transparant A third aspect is transparency and by extension the possibility to explain  the actions of AI and to account for its use (to the outside world). The  individual and/or the society must be able to get an understanding of how  decisions are made and what the consequences are for social actors. This  applies first of all to decision-making that has a substantial influence on  the individual or society. Transparency does not necessarily imply that  algorithms and data usage must be understood. Is the application ethical and legitimate? Reliability, safety and transparency are necessary preconditions for the  ethical use of AI. But even if these preconditions are properly met, the use  of AI is not ethical by definition. For example, the purpose for which AI is  used may be illegal itself (e.g. discrimination). Other values or interests  could outweigh the goal, or the way the goal is achieved is not ethical. Purpose The purpose of the AIIA is not to tell what is and is not allowed when  deploying AI. It is first of all up to the users of AI to decide what they  consider ethical and which values they pursue with an AI application.  Obviously, this consideration must be in line with the social views on what  is ethical and comply with laws and regulations in force. The “Artificial  Intelligence Code of Conduct” in annex 1 offers a roadmap to develop the  ethical framework. Values In society, values translate into standards, laws and rules. That is why  the legal framework is the first concrete assessment frameworkto use to  determine whether an AI application is ethical. This concerns laws and  regulations, codes of conduct and ethical codes.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentPart 1 - Background Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 31 The deployment of AI must be in line with the objectives and ethical  guidelines of the organisation itself. The values that the organisation  strives for (the relationship with customers, sustainability, diversity, etc.)  must be reflected in the deployment of AI. Furthermore, the deployment of  AI cannot be separated from its broader embedding within an organisation  and the interaction between the employees and the deployment. Within the  organisation, it is also necessary to make choices about control measures  in order to achieve a reliable, safe and transparent deployment of AI. Ethical lenses Ethics has different reasoning methods. It is, as it were, the lens you use  to look at a problem. It is important to be aware that there are different  lenses, which can lead to different conclusions. The most typical ‘ethical  lenses’ are:  5  1. Consequence ethics  (or consequentialism) emphasises the  consequences of an action. An action is morally good if the result is  positive. When a person in an emergency situation has to choose to kill  one person so that ten people can survive, then the right choice is to  kill this person. 6   2. Deontology  literally means the science of duties. Instead of focusing  on the consequences of an action, the starting point is compliance with  obligations. Doing the right thing means doing your duty. So the effect  of fulfilling the duty is not relevant in terms of ethics. When someone  finds it morally unacceptable to kill, it is the right choice for him or  her not to kill the person, even if the result is that ten other persons  cannot be saved and die.Relation Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) The AIIA and the Privacy Impact Assessment  (PIA), also called Data  Protection Impact Assessment  (DPIA) are both risk assessment tools  and partly use the same logic. Both instruments are complementary,  but not interchangeable. A PIA only focuses on the risks that processing  of personal data may bring to the data subject (the person whose data  are being processed). The AIIA is a broader instrument, which focuses  on all possible ethical and legal issues that can be associated with the  deployment of AI. Furthermore, the AIIA not only looks at risks, but also  offers a framework for making ethical choices for the use of artificial  intelligence. If a PIA has already been carried out within the framework   of the application, it is strongly recommended to include the results in   the AIIA. Practical application AIIA and ethics Ethics is a philosophical discipline that addresses the question of what  doing the right thing means. Ethics does not offer a checklist with what is  right and wrong; it is rather the method to assess what is right and wrong. Ethics as a discipline helps to approach and fathom a conflict, a  problem or a dilemma, to weigh different solutions and to analyse  outcomes on the basis of human and social values.   Ethics does not guarantee a flawless implementation. An ethical analysis  can lift a discussion about the design or implementation of an AI system to  a higher level and help to make the right choices (ethical use of AI).
Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment3. Virtue ethics looks at actions from the perspective whether they  are inspired by or contribute to a certain virtue. 7 What is virtuous,  varies per actor. Whether it is a good choice to kill one person to save  10 people depends on what a virtuous person would do. The right  choice is the choice that a virtuous person would make.   4. Care ethics Care ethics is focused on care for each other and building  good relations. The emphasis is not on general principles but on the  individual. Abstract ethical questions, for example what is good, are  overlooking the individual, according to care ethicists (with the result  that there is no morality). So the choice of killing someone to save  others depends on what relationship you have with the individuals. The ethical lenses offer you a starting point for analysing whether your  deployment of AI is ethical and form as it were your 'moral compass'.  What values do you put first and what is your starting point when using  AI? Are you going for the greatest happiness for the largest group, or are  you paying more attention to vulnerable groups? These lenses represent  the main currents in ethics and are therefore sufficient for a practical  approach to ethics in an AIIA.  Making choices clear Social actors can look at the same ethical dilemma through different  ethical lenses and therefore draw a different conclusion about what is  'ethical' in a given situation. By clarifying your choices and considerations  and the lens you are looking through, you can enter into a dialogue with  other social actors. When using these lenses, keep in mind that one lens does not necessarily  exclude the other. For example, choices can primarily be inspired by the  expected results (consequentialism), but the action can nevertheless be  restricted or controlled by certain principles (deontology).
Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 35 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA Organisations that want to implement an AIIA can follow the roadmap  below:   1. Determine the need for conducting an AIIA. 2. Describe the application and context of the application. 3. Determine the benefits of the application. 4. Determine whether the purpose and the way in which AI is   used are justified. 5. Determine whether the application is reliable, safe and transparent. 6. Document the results and considerations. 7. Evaluate periodically (create a feedback loop). It is worthwhile to enter with each step into a dialogue with the outside  world (representatives of end users, civil rights organisations, customer  panels etc.), to test whether your assumptions and considerations are in  line with the public views on ethics.
  Determine the need to perform an AIIA 8. Is the AI used in a new (social) domain? 9. Is a new form of AI technology used? 10. Does the AI have a high degree of autonomy? 11. Is the AI used in a complex environment? 12. Are sensitive personal data used? 13. Does the AI make decisions that have a serious impact on persons or  entities or have legal consequences for them? 14. Does the AI make complex decisions?Step 1   Describe the AI application 1. Describe the application and the goal of the application 2. Describe which AI technology is used to achieve the goal 3. Describe which data is used in the context of the application 4. Describe which actors play a role in the applicationStep 2 Describe the benefits of the   AI application 1. What are the benefits for the organisation? 2. What are the benefits for the individual? 3. What are the benefits for society as a whole?Step 3Is the application reliable, safe   and transparent? 1. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the reliability   of the acting of the AI? 2. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the safety of the AI? 3. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the transparency   of the acting of the AI?Step 5Considerations and assessment Step 6Review periodically Stap 7Step 8  Documentation and accountability Step 7 Are the goal and the way the goal is  reached ethical and legally justifiable? 1. Which actors are involved in and/or are affected by my AI application? 2. Have these values and interests been laid down in laws and  regulations? 3. Which values and interests play a role in the context of my   deployment of AI?Step 4 Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentPart 2 - Conducting the AIIA 37 Figure 1. The roadmap for an AIIARoadmap for conducting the AIIA
1Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 39 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 1  Determine the need to perform an AIIA Not every deployment of AI justifies performing a complete AIIA. Only  perform an AIIA if it is useful and necessary.The screening questions  below are used to estimate whether an AIIA is necessary or desirable. If  your answer to one of these questions is 'yes', then it would be a good idea  to conduct an AIIA. If your answer to multiple questions is 'yes', then AIIA  is highly recommended. 8 The questions relate to the social and political context (questions 1 and  2), the characteristics of the technology (questions 3, 4 and 5) and the  processes of which the technology is part (questions 6 to 9). Is the AI applied in a new (social) domain?  Is the AI applied in a domain where it has not been used before? For  example, an application that is used for the first time in healthcare while  previously, it was only used for marketing purposes. Due to the change of  domain, it is possible that the application will rise (new) ethical questions. When the application takes place in a sensitive social area, the risks and  the ethical issues are potentially greater. Think of topics such as care,  safety, the fight against terrorism or education. Think also of vulnerable  groups such as children, minorities or the disabled. Keep in mind that ethical dilemmas may also arise in seemingly  innocent usage contexts. The “Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct” (annex 1) and other sectoral  or service-related and professional ethical codes can also help determine  whether AI is applied in a sensitive area or topic. Is a new form of AI technology used?  Risks of technology are usually greater when they are new and innovative  than when they have been used and tested for a long time.1. 2.Overview The figure below is an overview of the logic of an AIIA. 1. What is the purpose   of the AI application? 2. Which (social) benefits   do I want to achieve?Purpose AI applicationSocial actors Accountability about  choicesEthical / legitimate  purpose, accurate  consideration of  interests and risksReliability, safety and  transparency1 2Assessment of ethical  and legally justified useDialogue Dialogue DialogueInteraction Figure 2. The logic of an AIIA
Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 41 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Does the AI make complex decisions? 11 As the decision making by the AI is more complex (for example, more  variables or probabilistic estimates based on profiles) the risks increase.  Simple applications based on a limited number of choices and variables  are less risky. If the way in which an AI has come to its decisions can no longer be (fully)  understood or traced back to people, then the risk of the acting or the  decision is potentially greater. With complex neural networks, for example,  it is not always possible to reason back how the AI came to the decision.7. Does the AI have a high degree of autonomy? The more an AI acts more independently and has more free room to make  decisions, the more important it is to properly analyse the consequences  of this autonomy. In addition to the room to make decisions, autonomy   can also lie in the possibility of selecting data sources autonomously. Is the AI used in a complex environment? When the AI is situated in a complex environment, the risks are greater  than when the AI is in a confined environment. The diversity of the input  and the number of unexpected situations to which an AI must anticipate  in an open environment is many times greater than in a confined  environment, which can lead to unexpected or undesirable outcomes.   For example, the use of an autonomous truck that drives in a closed  container terminal has fewer risks than an autonomous truck driving   on the public road. Are sensitive personal data used?  If sensitive personal data are used in the deployment of AI, the risk is  higher. Think for instance of medical data, data about ethnicity or sexual  preferences. 9 Does the AI make decisions that have a significant impact on  persons or entities or that have legal consequences for them?  When the AI makes decisions automatically (without human intervention)  and the decision can lead to someone experiencing legal consequences of  that decision or being significantly affected otherwise, the risk is greater.  Think of: not being able to get a mortgage, losing your job, a wrong  medical diagnosis or reputational damage due to a certain categorisation. 103. 4. 5. 6.
2 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 43 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment What is ethical must therefore be made explicit and quantifiable as much  as possible, so that the AI can seek an optimal solution to the problem  based on the desired values and interests. This can be achieved by  defining the desired goal state and possible rules and constraints to  achieve this goal state. For more complex situations, this can also be the  definition of 'target' or 'utility' functions. These purpose functions describe  the utility of a particular state for an AI. The AI bases its choices on the  consequences this has for the defined purpose functions, whereby it seeks  maximum utility. However, different purpose functions and the associated values and  interests may conflict. It is therefore up to man, not only to make explicit  what the purpose functions are, but also how they relate to each other. 13  The following (strongly simplified example) illustrates this: The dilemma of the autonomous car An autonomous car has been given the  purpose function to get from point A to  point B as quickly as possible. Given this  function, the car will probably drive as fast  as possible and will not take into account  the safety of other road users,because this is not relevant to the  assignment. If the same autonomous car  has only been given the assignment to  guarantee road safety, then the car will  probably not leave, because the most  secure option is not moving.Step 2  Describe the AI application The analysis starts by describing the goals that an organisation wants   to achieve by applying AI. Which policy goal or commercial goal does   the organisation pursue and how does the deployment of AI help to  achieve this goal? Without a clear description of the goal, it is impossible to assess whether  the application is ethical. Describe the application and the goal of the application AI can be deployed in many forms, from relatively simple decision support  systems to fully autonomous cars or even weapon systems. Therefore,  describe the product, service, system or process in which the deployment  of AI plays a role, the form in which AI will be deployed and the goal. In addition to the general description of the goal, it is also important  to describe in more detail the 'room' the AI has and the values that are  being pursued. To this end, the following questions must be answered: 1. Are the specific objectives of the deployment of the AI and the desired  final state (goal state) sufficiently clearly defined? 2. How does the output of the AI contribute to achieving the goal? 3. Is the context in which the AI must achieve this goal sufficiently clear  and delimited? 4. Is there a hierarchy of goals /interests? 5. What are the rules /constraints that the AI has to respect? 6. What is an acceptable tolerance /margin of error? AI should have an understanding of ethical behaviour. This means that   the AI 'understands' within the relevant context what is regarded as ethical  behaviour by the user /society. 12 1.
Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 45 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Describe which actors play a role in the application  Describe which actors play a role in or with the application, what their  position is and what their expectations or wishes are (a stakeholder's  analysis). This concerns in particular the actors in society with whom the  application comes into contact. Think of citizens, other organisations and  the government.4. In the previous example, both purpose functions must therefore be  combined to achieve an optimal result. To this end, it must be made  explicit what road safety means in concrete terms and what the  importance is in relation to achieving the other goal (going from A to B).  If this is explicit (quantifiable), the AI can design an optimal strategy to  achieve its goals. Here too, ethical lenses play a role (zie page 27 ): is an AI designed  to make choices that are consistent in nature or does the AI act  deontologically? In other words, does the AI make decisions based on  what yields the most for the defined value, or does the AI always act in  accordance with specific ethical principles, even though the result may be  less or even negative for the defined value? It is therefore again important  to realise that one lens does not necessarily exclude the other. Describe which AI technology is used to achieve the goal Give a description of the AI technology or technologies used. This mainly  concerns the features of the system, the input and output, the system's  autonomy and how it effectively acts within the room that is given. Describe which data are used in the context of the application Describe the data sources that are used to have the AI make decisions  (the input) and the origin of these sources. Think of the training data that  are used to train an algorithm and the data that the system then uses to  actually work Include sensor data in the description of the data that the system uses as  input. Also take into account the quality of the data and the nature of the  data (e.g. synthetic data or real data). 142. 3.
3 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 47 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment What are the benefits for the individual? What benefits does the new application have for the individual?   For example, is the deployment of AI safer, more objective or fairer   than existing decision-making? Or does the use of AI enable a product   or service for the individual that was not possible without AI? What are the benefits for society as a whole? A deployment of AI may also have social benefits. Ask the following  questions to map the social benefits:   1. Which social interest is served with the deployment of AI? 2. How does the project / system contribute to or increase well-being? 3. How will the project / system contribute to human values?2. 3.Step 3  Describe the benefits of   the AI application When AI is used to achieve a certain goal, it is with the idea of realizing  benefits for the organisation, the individual and / or society as a  whole. Benefits can be, for instance, freedom, well-being, prosperity,  sustainability, inclusiveness and diversity, equality, efficiency and cost  reduction. 15 Describe in this step the benefits of using AI for the organisation, the  individual and society as a whole. These benefits should be taken into  account in the consideration of the ethical and legitimate deployment   of the AI. Benefits of the application are available at different levels and for different  actors. For example, the organisation that applies the AI will first of all  have to focus on realizing its own benefits (reducing costs, increasing  profit, et cetera). In the case of the government, the benefits will often go  hand in hand with social benefits (realizing policy objectives). In addition,  there may be social benefits in addition to or complementary to the  benefits for the government organisation. For example, the deployment  of AI in the context of HR can ensure the selection of the best candidate  (organisation benefits), but at the same time also prevent discrimination   in the selection process (individual and social benefits). What are the benefits for the organisation? How is the objective described in step 2 achieved and what advantages  does this have compared to other methods (cost reduction, efficiency et  cetera )? Also take into account at this point how the benefits to be realised  relate to the standards and values of the organisation. To what extent  does AI contribute to the goal and the way in which this is achieved and  does this fit within the norms and values of the organisation? Does the  application contribute to the organic objectives and is it in line with the  ethical guidelines of the organisation?1.
4 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 49 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment interests can give direction to the assessment whether an AI application   is ethical or not. Social actors have different interests. Through AI, existing power relations  can change and the interests of actors can be harmed or strengthened. AI  applications can therefore affect interests at different levels. For example,  the deployment of AI can very specifically affect the interests of an  individual (for example, a violation of his / her privacy), but the deployment  of AI can also influence interests and relationships at the level of society.  Think, for example, of changes in employment through the deployment of  AI. In this AIIA, the emphasis is on the interests of the individual. These  correspond to a large extent to the traditional fundamental rights (right  to freedom of expression, privacy et cetera) and the social fundamental  rights (right to education, employment, et cetera). Have these values and interests been laid down in laws and  regulations? Standards, values and ethical principles within a society are (partly)  crystallized in laws and codes of conduct. The goal of these rules is to  promote well-being, to protect (human) rights and to organise society. These laws and regulations form the concrete framework within which  your application must remain. Insofar as the frameworks are unclear or  incomplete, the design of your application must be in line with the values  that apply in society. In so far as your application affects the interests of  third parties, you must be able to substantiate why this is justified.2.Step 4 Are the goal and the way the goal  is reached ethical and legally justifiable? In this step, you determine whether the goal and, more specifically, the  manner in which this goal is achieved is ethical and legally justifiable. The starting point for your analysis is the existing legal framework.  But this framework can be incomplete or inadequate for a good ethical  assessment. That is why you identify the values and interests that are at  stake in the deployment of AI. In particular, you look at the possible risks  of your application. Identifying these risks is important, because it makes  you see what you could improve in the design and the deployment of AI.  The choices you make (are we going to exclude or limit risks, how much  residual risk do we accept, do we accept that our application creates  risks?) are the ethical trade-offs of the organisation. The ethical lens used  to look at the application plays an important role here. In order to assess whether the use of AI is ethical, you must determine  which values and interests may be at stake in your deployment of AI.   To this end, you can ask yourself the following questions: Which actors are involved in and/or are affected by my  AI application? Values (honesty, equality, freedom) are ideals and motives that a society  and the actors within it strive for. In Annex 1 you find the “Artificial  Intelligence Code of Conduct” with the ethical principles of the European  Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies, which can provide  guidelines for the analysis of relevant values. Because values are abstract,  it is often difficult to assess whether the deployment of AI is in line with  the values within a society. In general, acting in violation of values means  that the interests of the actors are directly or indirectly harmed (see figure  3). For example, impairing the value 'equality' can mean that a person  or group is discriminated against. That is why translating values into 1.
5 Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 51 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 5  Is the application reliable,  safe and transparent? Reliability, safety and transparency are required prerequisites for a safe  use of AI. Many of the risks of AI stem from inadequate reliability, safety   or transparency of AI. The questions in this step help avoid common  pitfalls in the deployment of AI and ensure a responsible application. This step is not only about the reliability, safety and transparency of the  AI application itself, but also about the broader embedding of the AI and  these preconditions within the organisation. In other words, it concerns  the entire system of organisational and technical control measures that  ensure that an AI is deployed reliably, safely and transparently by an  organisation. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the reliability   of the acting of the AI? The first precondition is that an AI application is reliable. In short,  this means that given the purpose function of the system, the system  consistently makes the right decisions. To be able to determine the  reliability, at least the following points must be taken into account. Are there clear criteria / parameters for the correct functioning of the AI? Based on the purpose target description from step 3, clear parameters  must be defined for the correct functioning of the AI. What is the purpose  of the AI? How should the goal be achieved? What are possible constraints  for the actions? On the basis of these parameters, it must be tested  whether the AI acts in line with the set parameters. When determining   the parameters, the values and interests as described in step 5 must   also be taken into account. Does the AI act consistently? The action of an AI must be consistent. This means that in comparable  situations, the AI should not suddenly produce totally different outcomes.  In order to determine whether an AI acts consistently, it must be tested 1.   Figure 3. The relationship between norms and values, laws and regulations,   well-being/human rights (IEEE, 2017)   Which values and interests play a role in the context of my  deployment of AI? There is a lively debate on values these days and many parties are  developing codes of conduct and standards frameworks. The Impact  Assessment is based on these frameworks, without choosing a single one:  Annex I contains a code of conduct (from the European Group on Ethics in  Science and New Technology) and rules of practice (an update of the rules  of practice of the guide Autonomous Systems, published by ECP in 2006),  which can help to describe values and interests that may be affected by  the deployment of AI. 16 A number of questions (as examples) have been  formulated for each of the values and interests that help to orientate  thoughts about the ethical aspects and risks associated with the value   in question. 3.facilitate leid tofacilitateWell-being /  human rights Standards and values,  ethical principlesLaws and   (behavioural) rulesEthically Aligned Design
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentPart 2 - Conducting the AIIA 53 it is sufficient that the process can be reconstructed if necessary   (for example for a judicial review). Are the correct data available and chosen for the deployment of the AI? AI depends on the data used for correct operation. It is therefore important  to assess whether the correct data are used and how these data are  offered by the AI. This applies both to the phase in which the AI learns and  is trained, and in the phase of actual application. Insofar as the system is trained using training data, it must be assessed  whether these data accurately reflect the actual environment and the  problem area in which the AI will operate. In particular, account must  be taken of teaching wrong behaviour through the selection and use of  data (e.g. sample selection bias). This is to prevent things like bias and  discrimination. When applied in a 'live' environment, measures must be taken   to ensure the availability of the correct sources and the integrity   of these sources. Have the right algorithms been chosen that enable artificial intelligence   to act effectively and achieve the goal? In order to guarantee the correct operation of the system, the correct  components must be used, in particular the algorithms used for   decision making. Which methods are used to verify whether the AI remains within the   set parameters? In order to be able to check whether the AI is acting correctly and is  reliable, the functioning of an AI must be tested. This involves technical  and organisational measures to check afterwards whether the choices of  the AI have led to the correct result and that there is no adverse effect  on the individual or society. The testing of an AI application plays an  important role in this.on the basis of the set parameters whether the AI acts consistently. With  learning AI systems, it must be taken into account that the actions can  change over time. How is dealt with the unpredictability of the AI's actions? Given the complexity of decision making by AI, there is an increasing  number of situations in which it is not (completely) clear and / or  reproducible why an AI has made a certain decision.   AlphaGo A well-known example is the AI AlphaGo  who made a completely unpredictable  and inimitable move in round 37 of a  game of Go against the human world  champion Lee Sedol, which ultimately  resulted in the win. 17 This is not a  problem within the context of a defined and limited game with clear rules. But  if an AI is situated in the physical world,  where the complexity is endlessly larger  so that 'correct' action is more difficult  to define, unpredictable behaviour is  potentially risky.     The fact that AI is now too complex to fully understand should not be an  excuse for the uncontrolled introduction of an AI in a 'live' environment  where it has to make important or risky decisions. With the deployment  of AI, it must be determined how to deal with the unpredictability of the  system and to what extent failure to reconstruct results is problematic  for the deployment of the AI. It must also be indicated how reacted to  unexpected outcomes and what mitigation measures there are to limit the  negative consequences. It is important here whether it concerns decision  making that people must be able to understand in real time, or whether 
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentPart 2 - Conducting the AIIA 55 are aimed at removing or reducing threats that make data unavailable  (e.g. taking measures to stop DDoS attacks). Which measures have been taken to guarantee the transparency   of the acting of the AI? Transparency can constitute an important contribution to the legitimate  and ethical deployment of AI. This concerns the public nature of the use  and functioning of AI. Transparency can be offered at different levels  (openness of use and operation, insight into the consequences and  the possibility of accountability). The degree of transparency is partly  dependent on the potential impact that the application has on the end user.  As the size increases, a higher degree of transparency is appropriate. To what extent is AI transparent? The organisation must assess to what extent it is transparent about the  deployment of AI. The purpose of transparency is to explain the use and  operation of AI. For example, the operation of AI can be checked ex post  (for example during an audit or after an incident). The most complete form  of transparency is the publication of all algorithms, the datasets used and  the results. This way, everyone can verify whether the AI application is  correct. However, this form of transparency requires technical knowledge  and does not necessarily provide insight into the use and the operation  of the AI application. 18 In addition, however, there may be considerations  for organisations to keep their algorithms and datasets secret. In addition  to commercial considerations such as not wanting to disclose intellectual  property, other issues such as protecting the privacy of individuals or  national security may also play a role. In addition to full transparency, more limited forms of transparency can  also be envisaged, such as can be found in Article 13 or Article 22 of the  General Data Protection Regulation. Article 13 states that when there  is 'automated decision-making without human intervention', the logic of  decision-making and the possible consequences thereof for the person  concerned must be clearly communicated.3.Which measures have been taken to guarantee the safety   of the AI? An AI must not pose a danger to its environment. In the deployment of AI,  therefore, the safety aspects of the application must be taken into account.  This is particularly important when the AI system is situated in the  physical world and can also cause physical damage there.  A large part of the risk-limiting measures aimed at ensuring reliability  of the actions of the AI will also be relevant to guarantee safety. Which safety measures must be taken (also) depends on the risks  identified in step 5. In addition to the fact that an AI must operate safely in a certain  environment, the (digital) safety of the AI itself is also important. This  concerns in particular the information security and the associated  interests of confidentiality, integrity and availability. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the safety of the AI? In many cases, the data processed by an AI must remain confidential.  Measures taken to ensure confidentiality are aimed at preventing  unauthorized access to the data that an AI processes in order to be able to  function. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the integrity of the AI? For the AI to work properly and to protect the rights and freedoms of  third parties, the data processed by the AI must be protected against  manipulation and damage. Measures taken to ensure integrity are aimed  at preventing unauthorized access and adaptation of the data that an AI  processes in order to work properly. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the availability of the AI? For the AI to work properly to protect the rights and freedoms of third  parties, the data processed by the AI must be and remain available.  Without data, the AI cannot function (properly). The same applies to  models and algorithms used. Measures taken to ensure availability 2.
6Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 57 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 6  Considerations and assessment In assessing whether the AI application is ethical, the benefits (step 3)  and the identified risks (step 4) must be considered jointly. At least the  following elements must be kept in mind. Is the application proportional? In order to be able to form an opinion on the legitimacy of the application,  it must be assessed whether the deployment of AI is proportional. The  question that has to be asked is: what is the goal that is being pursued  with the AI application and how does this goal relate to the impact of the  AI application on the individual and / or society as a whole? Although the  end does not sanctify the means, in general a more legitimate purpose will  be more permissible. Can the same goal be achieved with less drastic means?  Subsidiarity must be assessed together with the proportionality of the  application. This means that there should not be any less drastic way to  achieve the same goal. In the context of AI, the need for data processing,  the degree of autonomy and the complexity of the AI must be considered. Is it about positive sum instead of zero sum? It is important that the assessment of whether an application is  legitimate / ethical is not a zero sum game . This means that it should not  be purely a choice for one interest that outweighs the other interest. All  values and interests must be optimally served by an application. Only  where interests can no longer be united with each other or are at the  expense of each other, it must be determined which interest outweighs   the others. Are there any residual risks? When assessing whether an application is legitimate, even with a positive  sum approach, it will be necessary to consider which risk is acceptable.  Determine whether the risks that you have identified have been or are  eliminated through risk-limiting measures or that there is still residual risk.Is it possible to have insight into the consequences of AI? In addition to the existence and operation of the AI, it is also relevant to  provide insight into the consequences of the deployment of the AI. This  may involve providing individuals with insight into how decision making  by an AI influences their (legal) position, but also the broader social  consequences of the deployment of AI, for example on issues such as  employment. Which control measures are applied? For a careful deployment of AI, technical and organisational (management)  measures must be taken. An organisation must be able to account  externally and, where relevant, externally ( accountability ) about these  control measures. This can be done, for example, through audits. To test the measures taken and the deployment of AI in general, an  'algorithmic audit' is recommended. This audit, carried out by an  independent third party, is to check the use of the algorithms and data.
7Part 2 - Conducting the AIIA 59 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 7  Documentation and accountability Record the results of steps 2 to 5. Pay particular attention to justifying  the legitimacy of the application. A good record provides direction for the  actual construction and layout of the application, but also enables you to  enter into the social discussion and, where necessary, to be accountable  for your choices. Whether an AI application is ethical and legally justifiable depends on  the person or organisation that makes the judgment and the ethical lens  used to look at the application. The opinion of the organisation applying AI  may deviate from the opinion of that of other social actors and / or society  as a whole. By performing an AIIA, you can substantiate and justify your  choices and considerations and enter into a structured discussion.Where residual risk persists, it must be substantiated why the residual  risk is accepted and what measures are taken to limit and repair damage  if the risk manifests itself. How is responsibility taken for further use? A final point that must be considered is the responsibility for further use  (downstream responsibility ). AI applications do not work in isolation, but  are linked to many other systems and processes. Account should be taken  of how data, decisions and observations generated by AI can work in other  systems and be used by other actors.
8 Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentStep 8  Assess periodically Assessing whether an AI application is ethical is not a one-off process. The  organisation and the outside world are changing. This may influence the  ethical and legal frameworks of the AI application and thus the legitimacy.  That is why it is important to periodically evaluate whether the application  is still justified. Especially for learning AI it is important to follow how the  AI develops and influences the environment. By periodically evaluating,  new risks are discovered in time, but also a feedback loop  can be created  that makes the deployment of AI better and more effective. An evaluation can take place with a certain time interval (for example  every year), but it is wise to also define situations that require a  reassessment. Think of:   1. The AI application is used for a purpose other than that for   which it was originally intended; 2. The decision-making room of the AI is extended or modified   in some other way; 3. New data sources are being used; 4. Existing data sources are modified or no longer used.
Bibliography 63 Bibliography
Bibliography 65 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Kool, L., Timmer, J., Royakkers, L., & Est, R. v. (2017). Opwaarderen -  Borgen van publieke waarden in de digitale samenleving.  The Hague:  Rathenau Instituut. Motivaction. (n.d.). Burgerschapsstijlen.  Retrieved 01-05-2018, from  https://www.motivaction.nl/onderzoeksmethoden/burgerschapsstijlen OECD. (2018, 05 09). measuring-well-being-and-progress.htm.  Retrieved  from oecd.org: http://www.oecd.org/statistics/measuring-well-being-and-  progress.htm Tewari, W. (2011). A structured approach to IT auditing : model based  development of audit terms of reference.  Amsterdam: VU University  Press. The IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent  Systems.  (2017). Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision for Prioritizing  Human Well-being with Autonomous and Intelligent Systems.  Version  2. IEEE. Retrieved from http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/  autonomous_systems.html Wildlak, A., & Peeters, R. (2018). De digitale kooi. (On)behoorlijk bestuur  door informatiearchitectuur of: hoe we de burger weer centraal zetten in  een digitaliserende overheid.  Boom. WRR. (2011). O verheid. WRR-Rapport nr. 86.  Den Haag: Scientific Council  for Government Policy.Advisory Council on International Affairs  (2017), The will of the people?  Erosion of the democratic constitutional state in Europe Committee on Technology National Science and Technology Council.  (2016). Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence. CreateSpace  Independent Publishing Platform. Retrieved 05 01, 2018, from   https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/  documents/Artificial-Intelligence-Automation-Economy.PDF Eck, M. v. (2018). Geautomatiseerde ketenbesluiten & legal protection: Een  onderzoek naar de praktijk.  Retrieved 5 1, 2018, from https://pure.uvt. nl/ portal/files/20399771/Van_Eck_Geautomatiseerde_ketenbesluiten.pdf ECP.  (2018). Artificial Intelligence. Gespreksstof en handvatten voor   een evenwichtige inbedding in de samenleving.  Retrieved from   http://www.ecp.nl/AI ECP. (2018). Het verhaal van digitaal. Samen vormgeven aan onze digitale  samenleving.  Retrieved from http://ecp.nl/publicaties/het-verhaal-van-  digitaal ECP.NL. (2006, May 15). Handreiking voor gedragsregels Autonome  Systemen. Juridische aandachtspunten voor de bouw en het gebruik van  autonome systemen.  Leidschendam: ECP.NL. Retrieved May 1, 2018, from  ecp.nl: https://ecp.nl/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Handreiking-voor-  gedragsregels-autonomous-systems-2006.pdf European group on ethics in science and new technologies. (2018).  Statement on artificial intelligence, robotics and autonomous systems.  Brussels: European Commission. Retrieved 05 01, 2018, from https:// ec.europa.eu/research/ege/pdf/ege_ai_statement_2018.pdf Future of Life. (2018, 05 01). AI principles.  Retrieved from Future of Life:  https://futureoflife.org/ai-principles/ ISACA. (2016). Cisa Review Manual,  26th edition. Kiran, A., Oudshoorn, N., & Verbeek, P. (2015). Beyond checklists: toward  an ethical-constructive technology assessment. Journal of Responsible  Innovation, 2(1), 5-19. KNMG.  (2013). Gedragsregels voor artsen , version 3.1.
Annex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 67 Annex 1 - Artificial Intelligence  Code of Conduct The Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct offers a guideline for  establishing the standards framework against which a concrete AI  application is tested when conducting an Artificial Intelligence Impact  Assessment (AIIA). This guide is generic in terms of the nature and context  of the application. In a way, the Code of Conduct is also a snapshot. The  debate about the frameworks within which AI is developed and applied  is very dynamic and has a broad spectrum of opinions and visions. It is  expected that further steps will be taken in the near future to come to  European and, if possible, international frameworks for the development  and deployment of AI. If further results are achieved in that process, it is  obvious to adhere to this code of conduct.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentAnnex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 69 Rules of practice The rules of practice are practical tools to apply AI in practice in practice.  This set of rules is based on and an update of the "Handbook for  behavioural rules autonomous systems" of ECP.NL.  10. We make the user identifiable where necessary 11. We provide insight into the operation and action history   of AI-systems 12. We take care of the integrity of AI-systems, stored information   and transfer thereof 13. We ensure confidentiality of information 14. We ensure continuity 15. We ensure traceability, testability and predictability of AI actions 16. We do not infringe intellectual property 17. We respect the privacy of people, and the laws and regulations   in that area 18. We clarify responsibilities in the chain 19. We have audited the information processing by AI systems Deel 2Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct The Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct is an integral part of the  Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment (AIIA). This set of rules is the  fundament under the AIIA.     Ethical principles ation of AI must comply with the following general ethical   principles, based on the European Group on Ethics in Science   and New Technologies.19 1. We do not violate human dignity 2. We respect human autonomy 3. We investigate and develop AI in accordance with human   rights and universal values 4. We contribute to fairness, equal opportunities and solidarity 5. We respect the outcome of democratic decision making 6. We apply AI pursuant to the principles of the rule of law 7. We guarantee the safety and integrity of users 8. We comply with the laws and regulations on data protection   and privacy 9. We prevent harmful impact on the environment  Deel 1 Figure 4. Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct
Annex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 71 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Part 1    Ethical principles Application of AI must comply with the following general ethical   principles, based on the European Group on Ethics in Science   and New Technologies. 19 These nine basic principles and democratic preconditions, published   on EU initiative, are a first step towards establishing a global ethical  framework. The principles are laid down in the "Statement on Artificial  Intelligence, Robotics and 'Autonomous' Systems" of the European Group  on Ethics in Science and New Technologies. These principles are based   on the fundamental values laid down in the EU treaties and the Charter   of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Human dignity: AI must not infringe on human dignity20  20 Every person has a self-contained and intrinsic value as a person that  cannot be compromised. Humiliation, dehumanisation, instrumentalisation  and objectification (using people as an instrument for a goal, without  seeing them as an end in themselves) and other forms of inhumane  treatment harm this dignity. In AI applications, consideration must be  given to human dignity and the way in which a proposed application  affects this dignity. Respect for human dignity means above all that  the application must be in line with human rights. In addition, where  necessary, it must be made clear to the individual that it interacts with an  AI application. Respect for human dignity can also force the abandonment  of the deployment of an AI application because a human intervention or  interaction is more appropriate.  1.Terminology When the AIIA refers to the 'user', we refer to the organisation that uses  AI. This can also be the employee who works with AI in an organisation.  When the assessment speaks about the 'individual' or the 'end user' we  refer to the natural person who uses the AI of an organisation (for example  the driver of an autonomous car) or is subject to the decision-making of  the AI (for example an applicant assessed by an AI). By 'stakeholders'  the assessment means all individuals and parties having an interest in  AI application and experience direct or indirect consequences of AI and  subsequent decision-making. 'Builders and providers' are the parties that  develop AI systems. Many AI applications are offered via the cloud. Parts The code of conduct consists of two parts:   1. Ethical principles and democratic preconditions as formulated by the  European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies; 2. Rules of practice for dealing with AI applications.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentAnnex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 73  •To what extent is there access to the source code of the AI application  (openness of algorithms) and is this knowledge usable for outsiders?  •To what extent can the operation of the application / the algorithm   be explained to end users and those involved?  •Is clear to end users (and other relevant actors) what the  consequences are of decision making by the AI?  •Can the used datasets be made public?  •Can the sources of used data be made public?  •Can the organisation be transparent in a different way for users   and stakeholders?  •Does the domain in which the AI application is used demand a   higher degree of transparency for users and those involved   (e.g. care or justice)?  •To what extent does the organisation or AI application take decisions  about or for the individual?  •Has a balance been found between the benefits of the goal and   the freedom or the individual?  •Is there a time when the individual can influence decision making   by the AI? Should this functionality be made available?  •To what extent does the AI direct the user in a direction desired by   the organisation ( nudging )?  •To what extent can an individual withdraw from (unconscious)  influence? Responsibility: the principle of responsibility must underlie every  research and every deployment of AI 22 Responsibility means that AI applications are only developed in  accordance with human rights and other universal values. This means   that during the entire process an AI application must have an ongoing  view on (research) ethics and individual and the effects that the  deployment of AI has on the individual and society. Because the negative  effects of AI applications are potentially large, risk awareness and wellconsidered application are important.3. •To what extent is human deliberation replaced by automated systems?  •Can people take over the automated decision-making process?  •Is there a strong incentive for people to follow the automated  decisions?  •Individuals who come into contact with the AI application are they  aware of this?  •Are people objectified and possibly dehumanized by the deployment of  the system? Autonomy: AI must respect human autonomy 21 Autonomy is the ability of an individual to act and decide independently. AI  applications can restrict people's freedom of action and decision-making  space. It also enables actors to influence people unconsciously ( nudging )  or even to manipulate them. Paternalism is a specific form of limiting the  autonomy of the individual from the point of view of protection. The idea  is that the organisation (or the algorithm) is better at decision-making,  because it makes better choices than the individual. So an AI application  can limit (or increase) autonomy for the individual, both consciously and  unconsciously. Transparency about the operation of an AI application gives individuals the  opportunity to appreciate the effects of the application on the freedom of  action and decision-making space. Transparency means that actors have  knowledge of the fact that AI is applied, how decision-making is achieved  and what consequences this may have for them. In practice, this can mean  various things. It may mean that there is access to the source code of an  AI application, that end users are involved to a certain extent in the design  process of the application, or that explanations are given in broad terms  about the operation and the context of the AI application. Transparency  about the use of AI applications may enlarge the individual's autonomy,  because it gives the individual the opportunity to relate to, for instance, an  automatically made decision.  2.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentAnnex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 75  •What values has the organisation decided to promote, and how?  •Are there specific groups that are favoured or disadvantaged in the  context where the AI application is used?  •What is the possible harmful effect of uncertainty and error margins  for different groups?  •Which choices are implicitly made in the architecture of the system?  Have these choices been made by the organisation that will use the AI,  or by the developer?  •Does the AI application take less biased decisions than the human  decision-making process?  •To what extent is the AI application a continuation of human bias?  •Are prevailing images and stereotypes reinforced by the application   or AI?  •Are values such as inclusiveness and diversity actively included   as functional requirements for the AI application? 5. Democracy: AI must respect the results of democratic   decision-making 24 A democratic constitutional state has an electoral dimension and a  constitutional dimension. The electoral dimension includes aspects such  as free and fair elections, a pluriform supply of parties and space for  debate and consultation. The constitutional dimension includes aspects  such as equality before the law, the right to redress, legal certainty,  protection of civil liberties, a free and pluralist press. 25 As the scandal with  Cambridge Analytica has made clear, the deployment of AI can influence  the election process. 26  In particular, governments in the deployment of AI should take  into account the impact that this application has on the democratic  constitutional state, especially where the constitutional dimension is  concerned. The democratic dimension may also be relevant in applications  that are further from the rule of law, because democratic values such as  diversity, moral pluralism and equal access to information can be affected. 5. •Which technical and organisational measures have been taken   to prevent or limit any negative effects of AI (risk reduction)?  •How can any unforeseen effects be mitigated after deployment   of the AI application?  •Is it clear who the legal controller rests for using the AI application?  •Can the organisation account for the application? ( accountability )? Fairness, equal access and solidarity: AI must contribute to  fairness, equal opportunities and solidarity 23  Fairness has various definitions. Fairness can mean that people get what  they earn according to relevant criteria. Fairness can also mean that equal  cases are treated equally (equality).Fairness can also refer to the concept  of social equality, the idea that the weaker should be given priority over  those who benefit from institutions that produce inequality. When using AI,  the user must assess whether the deployment of AI and the decisions that  are taken lead to just results. It should be kept in mind that information  systems are never entirely value-neutral. In the design of the system,  (implicit) choices for certain values are often decided (e.g. efficiency  versus accuracy). Applications of AI can exhibit unwanted bias when the  system design does not take conscious or unconscious bias into account  (think, for example, of a bias in the selection of data with which an AI is  trained). This can not only lead to incorrect or discriminating decisions,  but also, for example, that groups, behaviour or information deviate from  the prevailing norm (or the standard of the developers / users). It is important to examine what effects the AI application has, in addition to  the fairness of individual decisions, on more abstract norms such as legal  certainty, equal opportunities and equal access.4.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentAnnex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 77 Protection of data and privacy: AI must comply with the laws   and regulations regarding data protection and privacy 30  The right to privacy is the right to the protection of privacy. What privacy  means in practice strongly depends on the context. In the case of AI  applications, the informational dimension of privacy in particular plays a  role (the right to protection of personal data). Specifically, it can be linked  to the principles and rules of the General Data Protection Regulation.    •Has the organisation determined how the privacy of those involved   is protected?  •Does the application only collect and process the data necessary   for the application?  •Are end-users capable of determining which data of / about them   are collected and which conclusions are drawn from them?  •Can the user delete his data from the system? Sustainability: AI must not have a harmful effect on   the environment. 31  AI applications, like other technologies, have an impact on the quality  of life of our planet and the future prosperity of humanity and the living  environment for future generations. AI has a direct influence on the  living environment (think of increasing or reducing energy consumption  and e-waste) and an indirect influence, for example by stimulating  environmentally conscious behaviour (for example through decision  support or nudging.    •What are the environmental effects of the AI application?  •Does the use of AI increase or decrease the use of raw materials   and natural resources?  •What influence does the AI application have on the life of future  generations?8. 9. •To what extent does the AI-application undermine the principles  of democracy, for example because the technology enforces policy  without public deliberation?  •To what extent does the deployment of AI influence legal certainty   and civil liberties? Is this influence clear to end users, stakeholders,  and (popular) representatives?  •To what extent does the AI application affect free speech and the   forum for public debate?  •To what extent does the AI application influence democratic values  such as moral pluralism and diversity?  •To what extent does the AI application filter information from or for   the user (curation)?  •To what extent does AI block access to information?  •What are the criteria on the basis of which information is filtered,  blocked and curated?  •Does the AI have a bias regarding the information to be filtered? Rule of law, accountability and liability: applications of AI must  comply with and submit to the principles of the rule of law 27 Safety, physical and mental integrity: AI systems must respect   the safety and integrity of users 28 Safety in the context of AI applications is about more than the physical  safety for the user or the environment in which the AI application is used. 29  Internal safety and reliability ( cybersecurity ) and emotional safety in  human-machine interaction must also be guaranteed. Special attention  should be paid to vulnerable groups that may come into contact with the  AI application.    •What is the effect on the physical safety of the users and environment  of the AI application?  •To what extent is the cyber security of the application guaranteed?  •What effect does the AI application have on the emotional safety of  users and stakeholders?  •Which vulnerable groups can come into contact with the AI  application? How has it been ensured that these groups do not   suffer any adverse effects from the application?6. 7.
Annex 1 - Artificial Intelligence Code of Conduct 79 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Confidentiality Parties ensure the confidentiality of the stored information in AI systems  built or used by them. Parties take appropriate measures to detect unauthorized disclosure   of confidential information, and make agreements about the actions   that should be taken when an unlawful disclosure is observed. Continuity Parties ensure the continuity of the AI-systems offered or used by them. Parties take appropriate measures to prevent an error in an AI system   or the platform on which it is running, leading to the complete loss of   an AI system. Testability, predictability and traceability Parties ensure the traceability, testability and predictability of the actions  performed by an AI-system. Parties ensure the integrity of the logs generated by AI-systems. Parties ensure the confidentiality of generated logs. Intellectual property Parties (builder, user and other stakeholders and / or end-user) will make  prior clear agreements about the intellectual property rights and trade  secrets relating to the system. This includes in any case: ownership / use  of existing intellectual property rights and business secrets of one or more  parties, and ownership / registration / enforcement of intellectual property  rights and trade secrets arising from the development and / or use of   the system. Before use, it must be examined whether and if so which intellectual  property rights of third parties play a role in the system. Subsequently, the  parties must ensure that no such intellectual property right is infringed.4. 5. 6. 7.Part 2    Rules of practice  This set of rules is an update of the "Handbook for behavioural rules  autonomous systems" (2006) of ECP.NL. Both components of the code of  conduct (ethical principles and practice rules) each have their own value  and function. The ethical principles offer a broad framework for AI at a  somewhat higher level of abstraction. The practical rules are generally a  bit more concrete. However, they have not been designed as a (conclusive)  elaboration of the aforementioned ethical principles, but do well with them  and provide direction for the deployment of AI in practice. Identification Where necessary, the user of an AI system must be identifiable. It must   be possible to link this identity to the AI system. Transparency The parties must check whether they have a corresponding picture of   the possibilities and impossibilities of the AI system used. If possible, builders and users of AI systems provide clear insight into   the functioning of the AI systems they have built or offered. Builders and users always give the end user insight into the history of  the AI systems that they have built or offered. This principle is only an  exception in those cases in which the generation of an action history is   not legally required and is not reasonably possible Integrity Parties shall ensure the integrity of the AI system, the information   stored therein and the transfer thereof. Parties take appropriate measures to detect violations of the integrity   of an AI system, and make agreements about the actions that need to   be taken when a violation is detected.1. 2. 3.
Artificial Intelligence Impact AssessmentPrivacy The processing of personal data must be lawful, proper and transparent. 32  The collection and further processing of personal data must be bound   to specific goals. 33  The data must be adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary. 34  The data must be correct. 35 The data may not be stored longer than  necessary. 36 The data must be properly secured.  37  Data subjects have the right not to be subject to automated decisionmaking that has legal consequences or otherwise significantly affects the  data subject.  38  Responsibility  In the development and application of complex AI systems where many  components and (sub) service providers play a role and where behaviour  cannot always be traced back to specific components or service providers,  measures must be taken to ensure that delineation of responsibilities   is clear. Audit Before using an AI system, it must be determined how (resources,  process) the relevant aspects of the information processing can be   verified by means of an audit.8. 9. 10.
Annex 2 - AIIA roadmap 83 Annex 2 - AIIA roadmap
Annex 2 - AIIA roadmap 85 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 2  Describe the AI application   Answer the following questions about the intended use of AI.   1. What is the purpose of the application? 2. Which AI technology/technologies are used to achieve the goal? 3. Which data are used to achieve the goal? 4. Which actors (suppliers, end-users, other stakeholders) play a role in  the application? Step 3  Describe the benefits of the   AI application Describe the positive aspects / benefits of the application by answering the  following questions:   1. What are the benefits for the organisation? 2. What are the benefits for the individual? 3. What are the benefits for society as a whole? Step 4  Is the goal and the way the goal  is reached ethical and legally safe? Describe the influence the application has on human and social values.   If values are negatively influenced by the application (e.g. privacy risks   or negative environmental effects), it must be substantiated how these  risks are reduced and if there is residual risk, why this is accepted.   Think of values such as:   1. Human dignity 2. Autonomy (freedom) 3. Responsibility 4. TransparencyStep 1  Is it useful to do an AIIA? Determine on the basis of the following screening questions whether   it is useful to do an AIIA. Is the AI used in a new (social) domain? Does the application take place on a sensitive   (social) terrain or subject? Is a new form of AI technology used? Does the AI have a high degree of autonomy? Does the AI make complex decisions? Is the AI used in a complex environment? Are sensitive personal data used? Does the AI make decisions that have a significant   impact on persons or entities or have legal   consequences for them? Are the results of the AI application no longer   (fully) understandable? If the answer to one or more of these questions is 'Yes' then it makes  sense to do an AIIA. Go to Step 2. Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No  Yes   No
Annex 2 - AIIA roadmap 87 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment Step 6  Considerations and assessment On the basis of the above (steps 3, 4 and 5 in particular), weigh up whether  the application as a whole is ethical. The following aspects can be included  in this assessment:   1. Is the application in proportion? 2. Can the same goal be achieved with less drastic means (subsidiarity)? 3. Is the choice for the application positive sum or zero sum 4. What are residual risks and why are they acceptable? 5. Will further use be taken into account ( downstream responsibility )? Step 7  Documentation and accountability Record the answers to the above questions so that the choices can be  accounted for, both internally and externally. Step 8  Assess periodically Evaluate in case of changes to the application and/or periodically if the  above conclusions still apply.5. Fairness 6. Democracy and rule of law 7. Safety 8. Privacy and data protection 9. Sustainability Note:  Whether an application is ethical, apart from the goal, is also  highly dependent on the design of the preconditions (Step 5). Step 5  Is the application reliable,  safe and transparent? Describe the preconditions for the ethical deployment of AI (reliability,  safety, transparency) by answering the following questions:   1. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the reliability of the  acting of the AI?   2. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the safety of the AI?  •How is the safety of the AI in relation to the outside world  guaranteed?  •How is the (digital) safety of the AI itself guaranteed?   3. Which measures have been taken to guarantee the transparency   of the acting of the AI?  •Is the functioning of the AI (the logic of decision making)  clear / public?  •Is it clear what the consequences are of the deployment of AI   (in particular the consequences for end users)?  •Have measures been taken to be able to account for the   application ( accountability )?
Comments 89 Comments 1 https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/ documents/Artificial-Intelligence-Automation-Economy.PDF(OECD, 2018) 2 Practical tools are, among others, the Ethical Data Assistant (https:// dataschool.nl/deda/), the AI Ethics Framework (https://www. migarage.ai/ ethics-framework/), the AI NOW Algorithmic Impact Assessment (https:// ainowinstitute.org/aiareport2018.pdf) and the Princeton Dialogues on AI  and Ethics (https://www.migarage.ai/ ethics-framework/). . 3 Values do not have a fixed definition that can be converted into a code, but  are dependent on various cultural, historical and social factors. Within this  AIIA, where values are discussed where possible, it is made as clear as  possible what is meant by a certain value in the context of the AIIA. 4 The assessment distinguishes between the user of AI (the organisation  that uses AI for services, the employee who works with AI when carrying  out work), the developer (technology and platform parties, cloud service  providers), the end user (who directly experiences the consequences  of decisions and actions of the AI system, such as the driver of a selfdriving car or the citizen who is faced with a decision taken by AI) and  the stakeholders (the broader circle of parties who are affected by the  deployment of AI: such as social and political organisations, professionals -  and branch organisations). 5 The examples below are extreme examples and form a simplification  of thinking within these ethical trends. 6 In many cases, the consideration of the deployment of AI within an  organisation and the public debate is of a logical nature: if the result  of the use of AI has a positive effect on the interests mentioned in the  AIIA, or in a weighing of interests it is justified to accept certain risks  of AI, the application is regarded as ethical and legitimate. . 7 Virtues are qualities of a person who are considered morally good. The four  cardinal virtues are prudence, fairness, moderation, and courage.. 8 If it is to be expected that you will process personal data when using an  AI, it is advisable to combine this step with the consideration of whether a  DPIA is necessary. 9 Also see article 9 General Data Protection Regulation 10 Also see article 22 General Data Protection Regulation 11 When we speak about decision making by AI, we mean the action of the  AI to arrive at the optimal outcome for the goals and values as defined by  man. So although the AI makes decisions in order to arrive at an optimal  outcome, this is based on the goals and the associated objective functions  as defined by the user. The outcome can also be an advice, whereby a  person makes the actual decision in the end..
Comments 91 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 21 Note to the EGE (2018): The principle of autonomy implies the freedom  of the human being. This translates into human responsibility and thus  control over and knowledge about ‘autonomous’ systems as they must not  impair freedom of human beings to set their own standards and norms  and be able to live according to them. All ‘autonomous’ technologies must,  hence, honour the human ability to choose whether, when and how to  delegate decisions and actions to them. This also involves the transparency  and predictability of ‘autonomous’ systems, without which users would not  be able to intervene or terminate them if they would consider this morally  required 22 Note to EGE (2018): The principle of responsibility must be fundamental  to AI research and application. ‘Autonomous’ systems should only be  developed and used in ways that serve the global social and environmental  good, as determined by outcomes of deliberative democratic processes.  This implies that they should be designed so that their effects align with  a plurality of fundamental human values and rights. As the potential  misuse of ‘autonomous’ technologies poses a major challenge, risk  awareness and a precautionary European Group on Ethics in Science  and New Technologies 17 approach are crucial. Applications of AI and  robotics should not pose unacceptable risks of harm to human beings,  and not compromise human freedom and autonomy by illegitimately and  surreptitiously reducing options for and knowledge of citizens. They should  be geared instead in their development and use towards augmenting  access to knowledge and access to opportunities for individuals. Research,  design and development of AI, robotics and ‘autonomous’ systems should  be guided by an authentic concern for research ethics, social accountability  of developers, and global academic cooperation to protect fundamental  rights and values and aim at designing technologies that support these,  and not detract from them. 23 Note to EGE (2018): AI should contribute to global justice and equal  access to the benefits and advantages that AI, robotics and ‘autonomous’  systems can bring. Discriminatory biases in data sets used to train and  run AI systems should be prevented or detected, reported and neutralised  at the earliest stage possible. We need a concerted global effort towards  equal access to ‘autonomous’ technologies and fair distribution of benefits  and equal opportunities across and within societies. This includes the  formulating of new models of fair distribution and benefit sharing apt  to respond to the economic transformations caused by automation,  digitalisation and AI, ensuring accessibility to core AI-technologies, and  facilitating training in STEM and digital disciplines, particularly with respect  to disadvantaged regions and societal groups. Vigilance is required with  respect to the downside of the detailed and massive data on individuals  that accumulates and that will put pressure on the idea of solidarity, e.g.  systems of mutual assistance such as in social insurance and healthcare.  These processes may undermine social cohesion and give rise to radical  individualism.12 The question whether an AI should have an ethical awareness of course  depends to a great extent on the context and complexity of the deployment  of AI. 13 Asimov’s ‘Three Laws of Robotics’ are a popular example of such an  hierarchy. 14 Quality can relate to the data itself (for example, are the data consistent  and complete) but can also relate to substantive qualities such as  truthfulness. Synthetic data are data generated by the computer. These are  data that are not 'real', but that reflect a data set with 'real' data as close  as possible. Synthetic datasets are used, among other things, to prevent  testing with real personal data . 15 See for instance: IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and  Intelligent Systems (2017). For social cost-benefit analyses, you can  connect to the General Guideline for social cost-benefit analysis of the   CPB and PBL and / or the Guide for social cost-benefit analysis in the digital  government. 16 This is not an exhaustive list. What values and interests are affected differs,  of course, per application.. It is up to the organisation itself to determine  whether other values and interests are at stake. The values and interests  mentioned also strongly depend on each other. Therefore these are not  interests that must be weighted in isolation. 17 https://www.wired.com/2016/03/two-moves-alphago-lee-sedol-redefinedfuture/ 18 Just as knowledge of the anatomy of an organism or the functioning   of cells has only limited predictive value for predicting behaviour.  19 The ethical principles are based on: European group on ethics in science  and new technologies. (2018). Statement on artificial intelligence, robotics  and autonomous systems. Brussels: European Commission. Retrieved  05 01, 2018, from https://ec.europa.eu/research/ege/pdf/ege_ ai_ statement_2018.pdf 20 Explanatory note to EGE (2018): The principle of human dignity,  understood as the recognition of the inherent human state of being worthy  of respect, must not be violated by ‘autonomous’ technologies. This means,  for instance, that there are limits to determinations and classifications  concerning persons, made on the basis of algorithms and ‘autonomous’  systems, especially when those affected by them are not informed about  them. It also implies that there have to be (legal) limits to the ways in which  people can be led to believe that they are dealing with human beings while  in fact they are dealing with algorithms and smart machines. A relational  conception of human dignity which is characterised by our social relations,  requires that we are aware of whether and when we are interacting with  a machine or another human being, and that we reserve the right to vest  certain tasks to the human or the machine .
Comments 93 Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment 29 Also see under ‘Step 4’, point 2: Which measures have been taken to  guarantee the safety of the AI 30 Note to EGE (2018):  Data Protection and Privacy: In an age of ubiquitous  and massive collection of data through digital communication technologies,  the right to protection of personal information and the right to respect  for privacy are crucially challenged. Both physical AI robots as part of the  Internet of Things, as well as AI softbots that operate via the World Wide  Web must comply with data protection regulations and not collect and  spread data or be run on sets of data for whose use and dissemination no  informed consent has been given. ‘Autonomous’ systems must not interfere  with the right to private life which comprises the right to be free from  technologies that influence personal development and opinions, the right to  establish and develop relationships with other human beings, and the right  to be free from surveillance. Also in this regard, exact criteria should be  defined and mechanisms established that ensure ethical development and  ethically correct application of ‘autonomous’ systems. In light of concerns  with regard to the implications of ‘autonomous’ systems on private life  and privacy, consideration may be given to the ongoing debate about the  introduction of two new rights: the right to meaningful human contact and  the right to not be profiled, measured, analysed, coached or nudged. 31 Note to EGE (2018):  Sustainability: AI technology must be in line with  the human responsibility to ensure the basic preconditions for life on  our planet, continued prospering for mankind and preservation of a  good environment for future generations. Strategies to prevent future  technologies from detrimentally affecting human life and nature are to be  based on policies that ensure the priority of environmental protection and  sustainability. 32 Personal data may only be processed for legitimate purposes. This means  that when artificial intelligence is used, it must first be determined with what  purpose the data for / by artificial intelligence are processed. This must also  be transparent for the outside world, more specifically those involved. 33 Once data have been collected for the legitimate purpose described above,  the data may also only be processed for this purpose. The only exception  to this rule is when the new purpose is compatible with the original overall  purpose. 34 No more data may be processed than is necessary for the purpose of  the processing (data minimization). The use of datasets by / for artificial  intelligence must therefore be limited to what is necessary for the proper  functioning of the artificial intelligence for the purpose of the specified  goal to which the artificial intelligence is used. Data minimization does not  always mean 'as little data as possible'. The artificial intelligence must have  enough data to function correctly. 35 he data must be correct and up-to-date. Incorrect or outdated data must be  modified or deleted..24 Toelichting EGE (2018): Key decisions on the regulation of AI development  and application should be the result of democratic debate and public  engagement. A spirit of global cooperation and public dialogue on the issue  will ensure that they are taken in an inclusive, informed, and farsighted  manner. The right to receive. education or access information on new  technologies and their ethical implications will facilitate that everyone  understands risks and opportunities and is empowered to participate  in decisional processes that crucially shape our future. The principles  of human dignity and autonomy centrally involve the human right to  self-determination through the means of democracy. Of key importance  to our democratic political systems are value pluralism, diversity and  accommodation of a variety of conceptions of the good life of citizens.   They must not be jeopardised, subverted or equalised by new technologies  that inhibit or influence political decision making and infringe on the  freedom of expression and the right to receive and impart information  without interference. Digital technologies should rather be used to harness  collective intelligence and support and improve the civic processes on  which our democratic societies depend. 25 See Advisory Council on International Affairs (2017), The will of the people?  Erosion of the democratic constitutional state in Europe 26 See: https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/cambridge-analytica-files 27 Note to EGE (2018): Rule of law, access to justice and the right to  redress and a fair trial provide the necessary framework for ensuring the  observance of human rights standards and potential AI specific regulations.  This includes protections against risks stemming from ‘autonomous’  systems that could infringe human rights, such as safety and privacy. The  whole range of legal challenges arising in the field should be addressed  with timely investment in the development of robust solutions that provide  a fair and clear allocation of responsibilities and efficient mechanisms of  binding law. In this regard, governments and international organisations  ought to increase their efforts in clarifying with whom liabilities lie for  damages caused by undesired behaviour of ‘autonomous’ systems.  Moreover, effective harm mitigation systems should be in place. 28 Note to EGE (2018):  Security, safety, bodily and mental integrity: Safety  and security of ‘autonomous’ systems materialises in three forms: (1)  external safety for their environment and users, (2) reliability and internal  robustness, e.g. against hacking, and (3) emotional safety with respect to  human-machine interaction. All dimensions of safety must be taken into  account by AI developers and strictly tested before release in order to  ensure that ‘autonomous’ systems do not infringe on the human right to  bodily and mental integrity and a safe and secure environment. Special  attention should hereby be paid to persons who find themselves in a  vulnerable position. Special attention should also be paid to potential dual  use and weaponisation of AI, e.g. in cybersecurity, finance, infrastructure  and armed conflict.
Artificial Intelligence Impact Assessment36 Personal data may not be kept longer than necessary for the purpose of  the processing. Data that no longer serve the processing purpose must be  anonymized or delete 37 The confidentiality, integrity and availability of personal data in the use  of personal data for / by artificial intelligence must be guaranteed with  appropriate technical and organisational measures. In addition to these  general principles, article 22 GDPR is also relevant in the context of  artificial intelligence. 38 When an artificial intelligence makes decisions without human intervention  (algorithmic decision-making), this is not permitted if this has legal  consequences or the parties involved become significantly different in  their rights. The GDPR and the Dutch GDPR Implementation Act make  some specific exceptions to this general prohibition. For example, if there  is explicit permission from the person concerned, or the decision-making  is necessary for the conclusion of an agreement, then the decision-making  is permitted. In addition, specific exceptions can be created in national or  European law.
