1   G20 Ministerial Statement on Trade and Digital Economy    1. We, the G20 Trade Ministers and Digital Economy Ministers, met on 8 and 9 June 2019 in  Tsukuba City, Ibaraki Prefecture, Japan, under the chairmanship of H.E. Mr. Hiroshige Seko,  Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry, H.E. Mr. Masatoshi Ishida, Minister for Internal Affairs  and Communications, and H.E. Mr. Taro Kono, Minister for Foreign Affairs, of the Government  of Japan, to further strengthen G20 trade and digital economic policy cooperation.   2. The G20 Ministerial Meeting on Trade and Digital Economy gathered all G20 members as well  as guests from Chile as 2019 APEC host economy, Egypt on behalf of AU, Estonia (for Digital  Economy), Netherlands, Nigeria (for Trade), Senegal on behalf of NEPAD, Singapore, Spain,  and Viet Nam. International Organizations1also participated in the Meeting.   3. We discussed the need to do more to achieve our common objectives for global growth.  International trade and investment should continue to be important engines of growth,  productivity, innovation, job creation and development.   4. Innovative digital technologies continue to bring immense economic opportunities. At the same  time, they continue to create challenges.   5. This Meeting, which gathered both Trade Ministers and Digital Economy Ministers together for  the first time, presented an opportunity to deepen our understanding of the interface between  trade and the digital economy.   6. We discussed how we can work together toward the realization of a sustainable and innovative  global society, by making full use of digital technologies, together with trade and investment,  and harnessing the benefits of technological transformation and globalization, taking into  consideration national needs, priorities and circumstances.    I. Digital Economy  1. Overview: Human-centered Future Society  7. We, G20 Ministers for the Digital Economy discussed how we can design and implement our  digital policies to maximize benefits and minimize the challenges from the development of the  digital economy, and to overcome challenges with special attention to developing countries and  underrepresented populations.  8. The G20 started the policy discussion on the digital economy under the Chinese Presidency in  the Hangzhou Summit process in 2016, in which G20 members engaged in comprehensive  discussion on digital economy, innovation and new industrial revolution. Germany established  the first G20 Digital Economy Ministerial Meeting and created an overall perspective on digital  policy with the G20 Roadmap on Digital Economy and the Ministerial Declaration. In 2018,  Argentina focused on digital government, the digital gender divide, infrastructure deployment                                                      1 International Organizations: APT (for Digital Economy), ERIA, IMF, ITC (for Trade), ITU (for Digital  Economy), OECD, UNCTAD, World Bank, and WTO. 
2   and the measurement of the digital economy, in addition to creating the G20 Repository of  Digital Policies. The Digital Economy Ministers issued a declaration, which noted that it is  essential to continue the work on further understanding of the market impact of emerging  technologies and new business models, like online platforms and the need to advance a fair,  predictable, transparent, competitive and non-discriminatory business environment.  9. Recalling these discussions, we exchanged views on how to achieve an inclusive, sustainable,  safe, trustworthy and innovative society through digitalization. We share the notion of a humancentered future society which is being promoted as Society 5.0 in Japan. Society 5.0 is a vision  of human-centered future society promoted by the Japanese government to achieve an  advanced society, which realizes economic growth and solves social challenges, by advancing  towards Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through the increasing convergence of the  physical world and the virtual world.  10. Digitalization is expected to continue creating benefits for our economies and societies as a  whole. The benefits brought by increased productivity through the use of emerging technologies  such as artificial intelligence (AI), fifth-generation mobile telecommunication technologies (5G),  the Internet of Things (IoT), Distributed Ledger Technologies (e.g. block chain) will empower all  individuals and firms by creating new opportunities, and generate new services and  employment, all of which can lead to greater well-being and further inclusiveness for individuals  and firms.  11. While digitalization has tremendous potential to deliver benefits to society, it also raises certain  concerns. Digital divide should be addressed with a commitment to evidence-based policy  approaches together with the efforts to improve the measurement of the digital economy that  enable the widest possible adoption and use of innovative technology. We should come  together to promote trust in the digital economy to harness the benefits brought by digitalization  as well as to mitigate the associated challenges.  12. The G20 also reaffirms its commitment to fighting exploitation of the Internet for violent  extremist and terrorist purposes, as well as promoting a free, open and secure internet, and  encourages the digital industry to continue to work together with all stakeholders in fighting use  of the Internet and social media for violent extremist and terrorist purposes, and addressing  content that incites terrorist acts.  13. We share the view that the digital society must be built on trust among all stakeholders  including governments, civil society, international organizations, academics and businesses  through sharing common values and principles including equality, justice, transparency and  accountability taking into account the global economy and interoperability. We note the views  given at the G20 Digital Economy Multi-stakeholder Conference, and look forward to the multistakeholders discussion at the 14th United Nation’s Internet Governance Forum at the end of  November 2019 in Berlin and the WSIS Forum at the end of March 2020 in Geneva.  14. Building upon the commitments and achievements of previous years, we, as G20 Ministers, 
3   commit to sharing and promoting national experiences and international policies to maximize  and share the benefits from digitalization of our economies and societies through the following  efforts.    2. Data Free Flow with Trust  15. Reaffirming the commitments made in Hangzhou, Dusseldorf, and Salta, we share the  understanding that digitalization gives us the opportunity to promote inclusive and sustainable  economic growth. Digitalization also promotes social and cultural progress and development,  fosters innovation, and empowers individuals and businesses, including micro, small, and  medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) to benefit from emerging technologies and data.  16. Cross-border flow of data, information, ideas and knowledge generates higher productivity,  greater innovation, and improved sustainable development. At the same time, we recognize that  the free flow of data raises certain challenges. By continuing to address challenges related to  privacy, data protection, intellectual property rights, and security, we can further facilitate data  free flow and strengthen consumer and business trust. In order to build trust and facilitate the  free flow of data, it is necessary that legal frameworks both domestic and international should  be respected. Such data free flow with trust will harness the opportunities of the digital  economy. We will cooperate to encourage the interoperability of different frameworks, and we  affirm the role of data for development.     3. Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (AI)  17. Recognizing the efforts undertaken so far by all stakeholders in their respective roles including  governments, international organizations, academia, civil society and the private sector, and  mindful of how technology impacts society, the G20 endeavors to provide an enabling  environment for human-centered AI that promotes innovation and investment, with a particular  focus on digital entrepreneurship, research and development, scaling up of startups in this area,  and adoption of AI by MSMEs which face disproportionally higher costs to adopt AI.  18. We recognize that AI technologies can help promote inclusive economic growth, bring great  benefits to society, and empower individuals. The responsible development and use of AI can  be a driving force to help advance the SDGs and to realize a sustainable and inclusive society,  mitigating risks to wider societal values. The benefits brought by the responsible use of AI can  improve the work environment and quality of life, and create potential for realizing a humancentered future society with opportunities for everyone, including women and girls as well as  vulnerable groups.  19. At the same time, we also recognize that AI, like other emerging technologies, may present  societal challenges, including the transitions in the labor market, privacy, security, ethical  issues, new digital divides and the need for AI capacity building. To foster public trust and  confidence in AI technologies and fully realize their potential, we are committed to a human-
4   centered approach to AI, guided by the G20 AI Principles drawn from the OECD  Recommendation on AI, which are attached in Annex and are non-binding. This Annex includes  the following principles of “inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being”, “humancentered values and fairness”, “transparency and explainability”, “robustness, security and  safety” and “accountability”. The Annex also offers guidance for consideration by policy makers  with the purpose of maximizing and sharing the benefits from AI, while minimizing the risks and  concerns, with special attention to international cooperation and inclusion of developing  countries and underrepresented populations.  20. In pursuing human-centered AI, G20 members recognize the need to continue to promote the  protection of privacy and personal data consistent with applicable frameworks. The G20 also  recognizes the need to promote AI capacity building and skills development. We will each  continue to strive for international cooperation and endeavor to work together with appropriate  fora in areas such as research and development, policy development and information sharing  through the G20 Repository of Digital Policies and other open and collaborative efforts.    4. Governance Innovation - Agile and Flexible Policy Approaches in the Digital Economy -  21. We recognize that harnessing the full potential of emerging technologies would benefit from  more innovation enabling approaches to policy making than in the past. We will strive for  innovation-friendly policies to capitalize the potential of digital technologies and look to remove  barriers to innovation accordingly.   22. We recognize that various countries have already taken steps with the intention of making  policy approaches more flexible, holistic, and agile, for example through the use of regulatory  sandboxes. Policies, regulations, or the removal of regulatory barriers can contribute to and  accelerate economic growth, and inclusive development by developing countries as well as  MSMEs.   23. We recognize that governance in the digital era needs to be not only innovation-friendly but also  innovative itself, while not losing legal certainty. Interoperable standards, frameworks and  regulatory cooperation can help in this regard. International as well as national policy  formulation with the involvement of all relevant stakeholders in their respective roles is  instrumental to address a wide range of societal challenges and facilitate discussion on how  technology can be better incorporated into policy tools.   24. To adapt better policy approaches and guide technical innovation, we support the sharing of  good practices between G20 countries, including by utilizing the G20 Repository of Digital  Policies established under Argentina’s presidency. We note the work of relevant international  organizations.    5. Security in the Digital Economy  25. Security in the digital economy is essential for strengthening our public’s confidence in digital 
5   technologies and the entire digital economy. We recognize the importance for governments and  other stakeholders within their respective roles to address security gaps and vulnerabilities.  These have a negative impact on digital innovations, and trust by consumers and businesses,  and thus hinder us from taking full advantage of the benefits of digitalization. Security in the  digital economy is also important for governments in providing their services.  26. Along with the rapid expansion of emerging technologies, including IoT, the value of an ongoing  discussion on security in the digital economy is growing. We, as G20 members, affirm the need  to further work on these urgent challenges.  We recognize the global aspect of security in the digital economy together with the need to  develop localized and customized frameworks and methodologies. Industry-led and market-led  global technical standards, developed based upon principles of openness, transparency, and  consensus help deliver interoperability. These promote trust, which is essential for enabling the  benefits of the global digital economy.  27. We recognize the need to raise awareness on the importance of actions to enhance security in  the digital economy. We also recognize the role played by stakeholders such as private sector,  the technical community and civil society, and relevant international organizations to further  discuss those issues. We note relevant international organizations working on security in the  digital economy within their existing mandates and efforts in security in the digital economy.    6. SDGs and Inclusion  [Tackling the Digital Divide and Promoting Digitalization]  28. Digital Infrastructure  We recognize that improved connectivity and broadband access is a necessary condition for  the development of the digital economy, as well as a powerful enabler of inclusive growth and  sustainable development. Therefore we support initiatives aimed at the promotion of investment  in domestic and international digital connectivity infrastructure, including fiber optic cables, 5G  and other ultra-high-speed connectivity technologies, scaling-up the fiber optics infrastructure to  avail fiber connectivity to a greater number of individuals and connectivity redundancy. We  acknowledge the relevance of appropriate policy approaches that, while recognizing national  circumstances, promote a pro-investment, fair, competitive, and non-discriminatory marketplace  enhance the accessibility, affordability, quality and security of connectivity and digital services,  and increase access to digital economic growth. We encourage the G20 common goal of  promoting universal and affordable access to the Internet by all people by 2025. G20 members  also encourage promoting connectivity in rural areas for rural prosperity with a particular focus  on poverty eradication and distance learning.  29. Digital Literacy  The digital divide recently is no longer just about access to technology, it is also about having  the right skills and knowledge to use it. Possessing the right skills and knowledge as well as 
6   creating consumer oriented digital environment has a direct impact on the ability of people to  reap the benefits of digitalization for their personal and professional life. We encourage G20  countries to promote digital literacy strategies with a special focus on vulnerable groups and for  labor market transformation.  30. Bridging the Digital Gender Divide  We reconfirm the importance of bridging the digital divide in ways such as development of skills  for digital literacy, enhancing digital access and adopting digital technologies with special  attention to the digital gender divide, while working towards the 25 by 25 goal that G20  members committed to in Brisbane, and to people who are living in remote areas as discussed  in earlier DETFs under the German and Argentinian presidencies. With our continuous support  of EQUALS and G20 #eSkills4girls initiative, we reaffirm that the participation of women and  girls in the digital economy supports stronger economic growth, innovation, and inclusiveness  and enhances societal well-being. We further encourage G20 countries to take actions to bridge  the digital gender divide, including through the development of frameworks to measure and  track sex-disaggregated data, and to make efforts to increase women’s access to digital  networks while addressing abuse and violent online behavior toward women, enhance women  and girls’ participation in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics), support  women’s entrepreneurship in digital business and work within existing partnerships and  frameworks. Technology should be accessible for all. The G20 could explore using the existing  G20 Toolkit for Measuring Digital Economy to add indicators on women in digital.  31. Inclusion of MSMEs and Entrepreneurs  MSMEs and entrepreneurs are important drivers of innovation and the digital economy.  Facilitative environment in which MSMEs can actively take part in the digital economy, including  by using leapfrog technologies, are helpful to create an inclusive and sustainable society. The  G20 will seek to exchange and share practices on the promotion and scale up of digital  entrepreneurship.  32. Inclusive Design for people at all ages /Persons with disabilities  In addition to an approach where people develop additional skills to use digital technology, we  acknowledge that digital technology, should be user-friendly and human-centered, and should  be designed for use by a diverse group of persons, including persons with disabilities, older  persons, or those with lower digital skills. For example, the use of new digital interfaces such as  sensors and VUI (Voice User Interface) could support inclusion of persons with disabilities and  older persons.  33. Digital transformation of industries  Digitalization can contribute to economic growth and social development in a variety of sectors.  Manufacturing, which is one of the most crucial industries in the global economy, is becoming  more digitalized, networked and intelligent. The G20 will share good practices and experiences  regarding digital industrial policy with a view to promoting high quality inclusive development of 
7   all sectors including manufacturing sector, and take actions to create a favorable environment  globally.  34. Smart Cities  To contribute to sustainable and inclusive growth in urban areas where most of the world’s  population and energy consumption are concentrated, the G20 encourages networking and  experience-sharing among cities for the development of smart cities, recommended by the  Business 20 and the Urban 20. Implementations of smart cities should take into account  transparency, resiliency, privacy, security, efficiency, and interoperability. Cities and networks of  cities that express an interest may join a Global Smart City Coalition, which has been proposed  to be established in October. The G20 notes the upcoming "Super City/Smart City Forum"  planned to be held on 29th of June in Osaka.    [Plan for action towards SDGs through digitalization]  35. In order to share the benefits of digitalization globally to contribute to the implementation of the  G20 action plan on the 2030 agenda on sustainable development and leave no one behind, we  will endeavor to share good practices and lessons learnt from their experiences in solving social  problems by using the G20 Repository of Digital Policies.  36. We encourage all stakeholders in their respective roles to work together in facilitating  digitalization in developing countries and regions, as well as globally, by making use of good  practices and knowledge-sharing. For this objective, all G20 members and other interested  countries are invited to discuss how to make use of good practices and knowledge and to set  actions into motion to collaborate, cooperate and support the efforts for digitalization, including  advance progress towards SDGs in developing countries and regions. We consider that digital  governance is an essential leverage of prosperity, social inclusion and environmental  sustainability with measurable results. We note the work of the Development Working Group for  the Guiding Principles for the Development of Science, Technology, and Innovation for SDGs  Roadmaps. We are committed to capacity-building around the world as a vehicle for  implementing SDGs.  37. The knowledge sharing activity will be supported by the World Bank and other relevant  international organizations, within their existing mandates and core competencies and managed  by interested G20 members and other interested countries.    7. Way Forward  38. We will continue to work toward a human-centric future society, and emphasize the importance  of working with all interested parties and stakeholders in sharing good practices and  experiences, including inclusive digital economy business models, in digitalization to advance  globally inclusive development of digital society.  39. We recognize the role and contributions of the G20 engagement groups and other civil society 
8   groups in the G20 process. We thank International Organizations, including the APT, ERIA, IMF,  ITU, OECD, UNCTAD, WB, and WTO for contributing their expertise to the work of the G20  DETF and welcome their efforts to maximize the positive impact of the digital economy.    II.  Trade  1. Dialogue on Trade Developments  40. We, the G20 Trade Ministers, exchanged views on the current trade environment. We agree  that expanding trade and investment will be important factors to promote future widespread  economic prosperity and sustainable growth.  41. We note that trade and investment growth slowed in 2018 and that this is contributing to a  weaker global growth outlook for 2019-20 than previously projected. While growth is expected  to increase in 2020, downside risks arising from the current trade environment could undermine  this growth.  42. We continued our dialogue to mitigate risks and enhance confidence among exporters and  investors, as we committed to do in Mar del Plata last year. We affirmed the need to handle  trade tensions and to foster mutually beneficial trade relations.  43. We strive to realize a free, fair, non-discriminatory, transparent, predictable and stable trade and  investment environment, to keep our markets open.   44. International trade is important for productivity, innovation, job creation and development. We  recognize the contributions that the WTO has made to this end. We agree that action is  necessary to improve the functioning of the WTO. We recognize our business community's call  for the G20 to continue supporting the multilateral trading system.     2. Sound Business Environment that Promotes Market-Driven Investment Decisions   45. We reaffirm that structural problems in some sectors can cause a negative impact, especially as  the global economy has become more integrated. We will strive to ensure a level playing field  and foster an enabling business environment.   46. Many members affirm the need to strengthen international rules on industrial subsidies and  welcome ongoing international efforts to improve trade rules affecting agriculture. Many of us  highlighted agricultural subsidies and agricultural market access.   47. In order to foster an open, transparent and conducive global policy environment for investment,  we recognize the value of improving open, non-discriminatory, transparent and predictable  conditions for investment.     3. Promotion of Trade and Investment that Contribute to Sustainable and Inclusive Growth  48. Trade and investment have contributed to widespread and sustainable global growth, inclusivity,  poverty reduction and sustainable economic development. In particular, Global Value Chains  are important features of the global economy, which can help shape trade, investment and 
9   development.   49. There is recognition that the benefits of trade and investment have not been shared widely  enough with all countries and all members of society, especially those who are vulnerable. We  need to enhance the benefits of trade and broaden participation. We also need to better  understand the effects of trade and investment, better communicate their benefits to our  citizens, and address their challenges.    50. We should promote, facilitate and increase the participation of groups that have not benefitted  sufficiently from international trade, such as women, youth and MSMEs, while assisting them to  seize the opportunities of international trade. We will continue to seek to enable enhanced  participation by developing countries and MSMEs in Global Value Chains in increasingly  meaningful ways. In this context, we recalled the discussion last year on key factors for G20  trade and investment policy-making options to support the participation and increase value  addition in agro-food Global Value Chains.  51. We take note of the “B20 Tokyo Summit Joint Recommendations: Society 5.0 for SDGs” as a  voice of the business sector, while recognizing different national views on these proposals.  52. We also take note of the adoption by the B20 of a “Business Voluntary Action Plan” which  reflects views from the private sector and the intention of global businesses to strengthen  efforts to jointly contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, through  responsible business conduct.   53. We shared information on business and policy examples that contribute to widespread and  sustainable growth and inclusivity through trade and investment with the aim of learning from  each other’s experiences, while acknowledging the different approaches of individual G20  Members, and noted the importance of the idea of Sanpoyoshi - benefitting the seller, the  purchaser and society. These examples will be publicly available.    4. WTO reform and Recent Developments in Bilateral and Regional Trade Agreements  54. Building on the G20 Leaders’ declaration in Buenos Aires, we will work constructively with other  WTO Members to undertake necessary WTO reform with a sense of urgency, including in the  lead-up to the Twelfth WTO Ministerial Conference.  55. We recognize the importance of transparency of the WTO Members’ trade related policies. We  note ongoing initiatives on transparency and notifications with this purpose in mind. We confirm  our commitment to fulfilling our existing notification obligations.  56. We also note ongoing initiatives to strengthen the activities of the WTO regular committees and  bodies in order to make the WTO function more effectively.   57. We confirm the importance of the role of the WTO in generating opportunities and addressing  various challenges. We reiterate our support for the work to agree on comprehensive and  effective disciplines on fisheries subsidies as mandated in MC11. We also note some ongoing  initiatives for updating WTO rules. 
10   58. We reaffirm the importance of the Work Programme on electronic commerce.   59. We note the ongoing discussion under the Joint Statement Initiative on electronic commerce.  60. Participants in the respective Joint Statement Initiatives under the WTO welcome the ongoing  discussion and confirm their commitment to achieve progress.  61. In order to share the benefits of digitalization worldwide, we recognize that there is a need to  enhance investment in infrastructure focusing on ICT, including in developing countries, to  facilitate their participation in the digital economy. We also acknowledge the need for capacity  building for women, youth and MSMEs to benefit more from digitalization. To this end, we will  continue our effort to harness and enhance the potential of trade and the digital economy.   62. We recognize the complementary roles of bilateral and regional free trade agreements that are  WTO-consistent.  63. We agree that action is necessary regarding the functioning of the dispute settlement system  consistent with the rules as negotiated by the WTO Members.     Ⅲ.Interface between Trade and the Digital Economy   64. We, the G20 Trade Ministers and Digital Economy Ministers, recognizing the growing impact of  digitalization on our societies and economies including in trade and commerce, reaffirmed the  importance of the interface between trade and the digital economy as stated in the Buenos  Aires Leaders’ declaration. We discussed related issues on the interface between trade and the  digital economy.   65. We exchanged views on various issues including the concept of data free flow with trust, WTO  discussions on electronic commerce, and needs for capacity building, bearing in mind the  importance of ensuring that all countries are able to realize their opportunities. Discussions  should continue with a view to enhance the benefits of digitalization, which is transforming  every aspect of our economies and societies, and can contribute to economic growth, job  creation, inclusion, development and innovation.     Ⅳ. Towards the Osaka Summit  66. With a view to deepening G20 cooperation in the area of Trade and Digital Economy, we jointly  recommend our Leaders consider these important topics at the Osaka Summit.    
11   ANNEX    G20 AI Principles 2    The G20 supports the Principles for responsible stewardship of Trustworthy AI in Section 1  and takes note of the Recommendations in Section 2.    Section 1: Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI    1.1. Inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being  Stakeholders should proactively engage in responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI in pursuit of  beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, such as augmenting human capabilities and  enhancing creativity, advancing inclusion of underrepresented populations, reducing economic,  social, gender and other inequalities, and protecting natural environments, thus invigorating  inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being.    1.2. Human-centered values and fairness  a) AI actors should respect the rule of law, human rights and democratic values, throughout the AI  system lifecycle. These include freedom, dignity and autonomy, privacy and data protection,  non-discrimination and equality, diversity, fairness, social justice, and internationally recognized  labor rights.  b) To this end, AI actors should implement mechanisms and safeguards, such as capacity for  human determination, that are appropriate to the context and consistent with the state of art.    1.3. Transparency and explainability  AI Actors should commit to transparency and responsible disclosure regarding AI systems. To this  end, they should provide meaningful information, appropriate to the context, and consistent with the  state of art:  i. to foster a general understanding of AI systems;  ii. to make stakeholders aware of their interactions with AI systems, including in the workplace;  iii. to enable those affected by an AI system to understand the outcome; and,  iv. to enable those adversely affected by an AI system to challenge its outcome based on plain  and easy-to-understand information on the factors, and the logic that served as the basis for the  prediction, recommendation or decision.    1.4. Robustness, security and safety  a) AI systems should be robust, secure and safe throughout their entire lifecycle so that, in                                                      2 This Annex draws from the OECD principles and recommendations. 
12   conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse, or other adverse conditions, they function  appropriately and do not pose unreasonable safety risk.  b) To this end, AI actors should ensure traceability, including in relation to datasets, processes  and decisions made during the AI system lifecycle, to enable analysis of the AI system’s  outcomes and responses to inquiry, appropriate to the context and consistent with the state of  art.  c) AI actors should, based on their roles, the context, and their ability to act, apply a systematic  risk management approach to each phase of the AI system lifecycle on a continuous basis to  address risks related to AI systems, including privacy, digital security, safety and bias.    1.5. Accountability  AI actors should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems and for the respect of the  above principles, based on their roles, the context, and consistent with the state of art.    
13     Section 2: National policies and international co-operation for trustworthy AI    2.1. Investing in AI research and development  a) Governments should consider long-term public investment, and encourage private investment,  in research and development, including inter-disciplinary efforts, to spur innovation in  trustworthy AI that focus on challenging technical issues and on AI-related social, legal and  ethical implications and policy issues.  b) Governments should also consider public investment and encourage private investment in  open datasets that are representative and respect privacy and data protection to support an  environment for AI research and development that is free of inappropriate bias and to improve  interoperability and use of standards.    2.2. Fostering a digital ecosystem for AI  Governments should foster the development of, and access to, a digital ecosystem for trustworthy  AI. Such an ecosystem includes in particular digital technologies and infrastructure, and  mechanisms for sharing AI knowledge, as appropriate. In this regard, governments should consider  promoting mechanisms, such as data trusts, to support the safe, fair, legal and ethical sharing of  data.    2.3 Shaping an enabling policy environment for AI  a) Governments should promote a policy environment that supports an agile transition from the  research and development stage to the deployment and operation stage for trustworthy AI  systems. To this effect, they should consider using experimentation to provide a controlled  environment in which AI systems can be tested, and scaled-up, as appropriate.  b) Governments should review and adapt, as appropriate, their policy and regulatory frameworks  and assessment mechanisms as they apply to AI systems to encourage innovation and  competition for trustworthy AI.    2.4. Building human capacity and preparing for labor market transformation  a) Governments should work closely with stakeholders to prepare for the transformation of the  world of work and of society. They should empower people to effectively use and interact with  AI systems across the breadth of applications, including by equipping them with the necessary  skills.  b) Governments should take steps, including through social dialogue, to ensure a fair transition for  workers as AI is deployed, such as through training programs along the working life, support for  those affected by displacement, and access to new opportunities in the labor market. 
14   c) Governments should also work closely with stakeholders to promote the responsible use of AI  at work, to enhance the safety of workers and the quality of jobs, to foster entrepreneurship and  productivity, and aim to ensure that the benefits from AI are broadly and fairly shared.    2.5. International co-operation for trustworthy AI  a) Governments, including developing countries and with stakeholders, should actively cooperate  to advance these principles and to progress on responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI.  b) Governments should work together in the OECD and other global and regional fora to foster  the sharing of AI knowledge, as appropriate. They should encourage international, crosssectoral and open multi-stakeholder initiatives to garner long-term expertise on AI.  c) Governments should promote the development of multi-stakeholder, consensus-driven global  technical standards for interoperable and trustworthy AI.  d) Governments should also encourage the development, and their own use, of internationally  comparable metrics to measure AI research, development and deployment, and gather the  evidence base to assess progress in the implementation of these principles. 
