2022 AI Principles   Progress Update
2022 AI Principles Progress Update2This page is intentionally left blank.
1 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateTable of Contents  Introduction  .................................................................................................................................... 2 Internal Governance and Operations  ........................................................................ 5 Resources, Research, Tools, and Responsible Practices  ........................ 22 Product Impact  ......................................................................................................................... 28 Supporting Global Dialogue, Standards, and Policy  ................................... 33 Conclusion  .................................................................................................................................... 37 End Notes  ...................................................................................................................................... 39
2022 AI Principles Progress Update2Introduction This year, we’ve seen AI help people find useful information in the conversational way  they speak to friends and family, thanks to responsible research breakthroughs in  generative language models;1 enable online translation across dozens of new languages;2  foster the equity of genomic tests3 and maternal-fetal health4 across populations; and  speed up damage assessments5 after natural disasters for humanitarian relief and  environmental efforts. That’s just a sampling of ways in which AI will have — is already having — longterm positive impacts on society across the business, healthcare, education, and  sustainability sectors. For much of the world, the flurry of research and development is delivering that future  already. Where AI-enabled products and services are only now emerging, there is an  opportunity — and a responsibility — to proactively identify and mitigate risks. Now  is the time to establish effective frameworks that embody the technology, practices,  values, and governance of responsible AI, because AI’s wide-ranging impact naturally  raises new questions about AI’s governance, safety, fairness, and effect on equitable  economic opportunities. Because AI is core to Google products, we at Google ask these questions daily. We  remain committed to sharing our lessons learned and emerging responsible innovation  practices, drawing upon more than 20 years of using machine learning and more than a  decade of AI research. Rooted in our near 25-year-old mission to organize the world’s  information and make it universally accessible and useful, Google’s innovation strategy  is to iterate on the process of innovation itself. This means that we create projects that  not only exemplify engineering excellence, but from their earliest moments embody the  human-centered values manifested in Google’s AI Principles. We do so by incorporating responsible practices for fairness, safety, privacy, and  transparency early in developers’ machine learning workflow and throughout the  product development lifecycle. This principled approach to AI research and development  is also practical: it can help avoid burning engineering cycles spent retrofitting  technology if an issue emerges after launch or even much later. This aligns with our  product excellence mantra to put the user first and with our focus on building for  everyone. Since we launched our AI Principles in 2018, we’ve built and tested an industry-leading  governance process to align AI projects across the company with those Principles. We  center our governance on three pillars:
3 2022 AI Principles Progress Update1. AI Principles , which serve as our ethical charter and inform our policies 2. Education and resources , such as ethics training and technical tools to test,  evaluate, and monitor the application of the Principles to all of Google’s products  and services 3. Structures and processes , which include risk assessment frameworks, ethics  reviews, and executive accountability This year, we expanded the central operations team for AI Principles implementation  across Google’s product development lifecycle, Responsible Innovation, and recently  moved it into Google’s company-wide Office of Compliance and Integrity for more  centralized governance across all Google product areas. This is a milestone moment that  reflects the growing maturity of our governance strategy. We are working to complement these internal frameworks by working with a number of  governments and organizations exploring concepts in AI governance. For instance: • Organizations like the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)6 and  National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST)7 are publishing AI management  frameworks early next year. • Singapore released its Model AI governance framework8 and continues to talk with  stakeholders in the financial services Veritas initiative.9 • India’s Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) is considering  Niti Aayog’s proposed Responsible #AIForAll10 to be incorporated into India’s AI  mission. • Canada,11 Brazil,12 and South Korea13 have all debated AI legislation, while the U.S.14  the U.K.,15 and Israeli16 governments are working on their own guidance. As our CEO has said, AI is too important not to regulate, and too important not to  regulate well.17 AI legislation and related principles and standards should help lower  risks to people without unduly stifling innovation or undermining AI’s promise for social  benefit at the global level. And of course AI frameworks overlap with other important  regulatory issues, including content safety, child safety, privacy, and consumer  protection. A holistic approach will help keep new rules from impeding innovation and  competition in AI and related emerging technologies. We hope that sharing our progress and lessons learned on issues such as responsible  AI, algorithmic transparency, privacy-enhancing technologies, and AI R&D supports the  important progress being made across the global AI community
2022 AI Principles Progress Update4Google AI Principles We will assess AI in view of the following objectives. We believe AI should: 1. Be socially beneficial:  With the likely benefit to people and society substantially exceeding the  foreseeable risks and downsides. 2. Avoid creating or reinforcing unfair bias:  Avoiding unjust impacts on people, particularly those  related to sensitive characteristics such as race, ethnicity, gender, nationality, income, sexual  orientation, ability and political or religious belief. 3. Be built and tested for safety: Designed to be appropriately cautious and in accordance with best  practices in AI safety research, including testing in constrained environments and monitoring as  appropriate. 4. Be accountable to people:  Providing appropriate opportunities for feedback, relevant  explanations and appeal, and subject to appropriate human direction and control. 5. Incorporate privacy design principles:  Encouraging architectures with privacy safeguards, and  providing appropriate transparency and control over the use of data. 6. Uphold high standards of scientific excellence:  Technology innovation is rooted in the scientific  method and a commitment to open inquiry, intellectual rigor, integrity and collaboration. 7. Be made available for uses that accord with these principles:  We will work to limit potentially  harmful or abusive applications. In addition to the above objectives, we will not design or deploy AI in the following application  areas: 1. Technologies that cause or are likely to cause overall harm. Where there is a material risk of harm,  we will proceed only where we believe that the benefits substantially outweigh the risks, and will  incorporate appropriate safety constraints. 2. Weapons or other technologies whose principal purpose or implementation is to cause or directly  facilitate injury to people. 3. Technologies that gather or use information for surveillance violating internationally accepted norms. 4. Technologies whose purpose contravenes widely accepted principles of international law and human  rights.
5 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateInternal Governance and Operations AI offers a unique range of risks along with its unprecedented benefits to the world.  Chief among these are issues of technical safety, when AI systems do not function  as engineers and designers have planned, and societal concerns, such as AI systems  reflecting historical unfair bias. We believe that through rigorous, structured operations, risks can be consistently  identified and addressed, while acknowledging that even despite best efforts not all  issues and harms can be identified in advance. Accomplishing these aims rests on three  pillars: our AI Principles, Education and Resources, and Structures and Processes. First Pillar: Our AI Principles Google’s AI Principles represent our first and foundational pillar. The Principles serve  as our ethical charter and are a key component of Google’s product excellence efforts.  Consistent policies and responsible practices enable the structured governance that let  us scale the practice of principled AI innovation. Second Pillar: Education and Resources The second pillar of AI governance at Google is our commitment to providing necessary  education and resources. Our structured employee education programs — including  in the onboarding for all new technical hires — offer a wide variety of resources that  help Googlers learn the critical-thinking skills necessary to apply the AI Principles as  frameworks for decision-making as early in the research and development process  as possible. These programs are reaching an ever-growing portion of the Google  population: • Course completions of our self-study tech ethics training, offered to all employees  across roles, product areas, and geographies, have increased 23% quarter over  quarter for 2022. • We have exceeded our 2022 goal of 20,000 full-time employees ’ engagement in  our Responsible Innovation Challenge ,18 a set of interactive puzzles that test  employees’ recall of the AI Principles, which we launched last year. • More than 34 groups have gone through our Moral Imagination workshops,19 which  help employees explore potential outcomes outside of their lived experience. We continue to create innovative internal training programs to teach the skills needed  to address emerging challenges. For example, this year, we launched a new, instructorled course, “Helping Users Navigate an AI World: Improving our products with an  Explainability toolkit, ” geared toward user experience designers, product managers, 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update6and ML developers. It introduces the concept of Explainability, and showcases  best practices in explaining how AI-powered products work. Internal ratings for the  usefulness of the course’s content average 4.5 out of 5 stars. Our cross-company AI Principles programs  are designed not only to educate but also  to motivate and mobilize participants to take action. The programs we reported on last  year grew in scope and reach in 2022. These programs are “20% ” volunteer projects —  Google’s long-time practice of offering employees 20% of their working hours, or the  equivalent of one work day per week, to dedicate to a passion project that could have  business benefits for the company and value for our users, with the approval of their  manager. For example, the 20% Principles Pioneers  program, which has an emphasis on people  who represent points of view currently underrepresented in the technology industry,  grew more than 460% this year — from 75 Pioneers in its pilot at the end of 2021 to  now 423, at 98 Google international offices. Principles Pioneers constitute an internal  community of trusted and trained employees who serve as AI Principles (AIP) advisors.  They identify global fairness, harms, and human rights related concerns while stress  testing AI-enabled products. They also supplement the work of the ProFair (“product  fairness ”) team,20 which also sits within our central AI Principles operations team. ProFair  has the explicit specialization and goal of testing AI products for potential weaknesses  and biases. By building centralized experience in red-teaming, we build upon the lessons  of testing across different models. This year we also launched a new internal program for senior managers and leaders:  the Executive AI Principles Ethics Fellowship . This program includes educational  workshops and training on the AI Principles for leaders across multiple product areas  and geographies. It’s based on our six-month AI Principles Ethics Fellowship , which  we launched in 2020 and which has trained a diverse set of 50 employees from across  17 global offices and 15+ Employee Resource Groups to learn about responsible AI  and contribute their perspectives to Google’s AIP operations. During the fellowship,  among other duties, fellows develop fictional, future scenarios for AI ethics challenges,  addressing topics such as deep fakes and misinformation. Their hypothetical scenarios  supplement a growing body of responsible innovation case studies  that our AI ethics  review teams draw upon as references when making decisions. The new Executive AI  Principles Ethics Fellowship is tailored to business decision makers’ needs. The inaugural  cohort consisted of sixteen executives across ten product areas, including Cloud,  Devices and Services (hardware), and YouTube.
7 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateAI Principles Case Studies Case study: Text-to-image generation models The Challenge Parti21 and Imagen22 are Google's text-to-image generation models. These models  allow users to provide a text prompt specifying an image, and that image is then  generated directly from the text. AI Principles reviewers recognized that allowing the  free generation of human images enables many significant potential harms (for example: Frozen Text Encoder Text-to-Image Diffusion Model Super-Resolution Diffusion Model Super-Resolution Diffusion ModelText Text Embedding 256 x 256 Image64 x 64 Image 1024 x 1024 Image"A Golden Retriever dog wearing a blue checkered beret and red dotted turtleneck. " 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update8deep fakes, images of interpersonal violence, images conveying harmful stereotypes,  pornographic images). Consequently, the decision was made to block the ability to  generate people in initial testing, even internally. As the internal launch progressed,  users expressed disappointment that they could not generate people with our models  — especially because similar non-Google models allow for the generation of images of  people. Researchers then tried to find a safe way to allow at least some images of people  to be generated. To accomplish this, they employed scaled adversarial testing, which  enabled the team to (1) generate 20,000 synthetic images of human faces, and (2) check  to see whether they could use existing ML classifiers to selectively block the generation  of photorealistic human faces — that is, faces that might belong to or resemble real  people.  Researchers were able to show that an existing face classifier works well even on  generated imagery. With this data in hand, they were able to loosen the prohibitive "no  people allowed " rule, and began allowing the generation of imagery of people — so long  as no photorealistic face is present in the image. However, while this mitigation helped  to reduce the risk of deep fakes or confusion with a real person, there remained a risk of  other harms such as unfair stereotyping. The Approach With guidance from the central Responsible Innovation team, Google is exploring a  framework for responsible externalization that balances the value of external auditing  with the risks of unrestricted open-access. The data requirements of text-to-image  models have led researchers to rely heavily on large, mostly uncurated, web-scraped  datasets. While this approach has enabled rapid algorithmic advances in recent years,  datasets of this nature often reflect social stereotypes, oppressive or biased viewpoints,  and derogatory or otherwise harmful associations to marginalized identity groups.  We’ve run dedicated rounds of adversarial testing to find flaws in the model. We enlisted  expert red teaming members — product experts who intentionally stress test a system  with an adversarial mindset — to help. We’ve designed our systems to automatically  detect and filter out words or phrases that violate our policies, which prohibit users  from knowingly generating content that is sexually explicit; hateful or offensive; violent,  dangerous, or illegal; or divulges personal information. We also eliminate risks of exposing  personally identifiable information by avoiding images with identifiable human faces. We  start with more stringent filtering, and refine as we go. This work has minimized the risk,  but not eliminated it, and we are continuously improving our capabilities in this area. 
9 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateImagen relies on text encoders trained on uncurated web-scale data, and thus inherits  the social biases and limitations of large language models. As such, there is a risk  that Imagen has encoded harmful stereotypes and representations, which guided our  decision to not release Imagen for public use without further safeguards in place. Finally, while there has been extensive work auditing image-to-text and image labeling  models for forms of social bias, there has been comparatively less work on social  bias evaluation methods for text-to-image models. A conceptual vocabulary around  potential harms of text-to-image models and established metrics of evaluation are  essential components of establishing responsible model release practices.  The Outcome While we leave an in-depth empirical analysis of social and cultural biases to future  work, our small scale internal assessments reveal several limitations that guided our  decision not to release our model at this time. As is the case with generative models,  Imagen may sometimes do a poor job of reflecting some parts of the data distribution,  especially in the more underrepresented parts. This may further compound the social  consequence of dataset bias. Imagen exhibits serious limitations when generating  images depicting people. Our human evaluations found Imagen obtains significantly  higher preference rates when evaluated on images that do not portray people,  indicating a degradation in image fidelity. Preliminary assessment also suggests  Imagen encodes several social biases and stereotypes, including an overall bias  towards generating images of people with lighter skin tones and a tendency for images  portraying different professions to align with Western gender stereotypes. Finally, even  when we focus generations away from people, our preliminary analysis indicates Imagen  encodes a range of social and cultural biases when generating images of activities,  events, and objects. As a result of the AI Principles review, Google aims to make  progress on several of these open challenges and limitations in future research.
2022 AI Principles Progress Update10Case study: A dataset for avoiding unfair gender bias The Challenge Researchers on the Translate23 team recently developed a new dataset24 for studying and  preventing gender bias in machine learning in alignment with AI Principle #2,25 “avoid  unfair bias.” This research explored gender translation between English and Spanish, and  English and German.  The research leverages the ways different languages employ gender markers to  investigate potential gender bias in translation models. Spanish is a “pro drop” language,  which means subject pronouns are optional. Both Spanish and German have grammatical  gender, so they mark gender on adjectives that modify people and objects. Spanish has  a single possessive pronoun for his, her, and their, but English and German have separate  pronouns for each. These grammatical gender differences across languages can pose  a challenge for machine translation systems. This challenge is especially difficult when  translating from a language without subject pronouns (such as Spanish) to one with  required gendered subject pronouns (such as English).  Traditional neural machine translation (NMT) methods translate sentences one by one,  but gender information often is not explicitly stated in every sentence. Seeking a novel  way to address this challenge, the researchers built a new “context-aware” model  that incorporates context from surrounding sentences or passages to be translated to  improve gender accuracy when personal pronouns are translated.  When translating between languages with and without grammatical gender, the  responsible AI challenge lies in training machine learning (ML) systems to choose the  appropriate pronoun or maintain gender agreement between references throughout the  content. Gender translation mistakes can be especially harmful errors, given that gender  markers often convey a person’s gender identity. The Translate team’s new dataset was  built to test the performance of this context-aware model, using gender differences  across English, Spanish, and German to challenge the model to correctly translate  people’s genders across multiple sentences. 
11 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateThe Approach The researchers applied for an AI Principles review of their dataset and proactively  requested fairness testing. Reviewers and testers assessed the team’s rationale for  using Wikipedia biographies26 as a source for data. The researchers chose Wikipedia  biographies because the entries are well-written, geographically diverse, contain multiple  sentences, and refer to subjects in the third person, using many pronouns. The reviewers  and testers also looked at the researchers’ strategy to prioritize equal representation  of feminine and masculine identities within the dataset, while acknowledging that  there were not as many biographies for non-binary people available on Wikipedia. The  researchers used articles about groups that are referred to using gender-neutral “it”  or “they” in English to train ML models not to incorrectly generate gendered pronouns.  In addition, the reviewers and testers looked at the researchers’ decision to investigate  gender translation accuracy for non-Western names by sourcing Wikipedia biographies  about people from 90 different nations spread across the world. The Outcome The result is the Translated Wikipedia Biographies dataset ,27 which can be used to  evaluate gender bias in translation models. This dataset enables a novel method of  evaluation to help reduce gender bias in machine translations. Because each instance  refers to a person with a known gender, the researchers could use the dataset to  compute the model accuracy of the gender-specific translations that refer to that  person. This dataset provided useful performance measurements for the new contextaware models; using the dataset, researchers determined that context-aware models  made 67% fewer gender translation errors than previous models that translated sentence  by sentence. You can find examples of the kinds of improvements the context-aware  model showed in the blog post28 about this research. In alignment with AI Principle #4, “Be accountable to people,” the AI Principles reviewers  recommended that the researchers publish a data card,29 which is a structured  document offering details about how the dataset was created and tested. With respect  to AI Principle #6, “Uphold high standards of scientific excellence,” the researchers  decided to share the dataset publicly to support long-term improvements on ML systems  focused on pronouns and gender in translation. The researchers make it clear that the  dataset focuses on a specific problem related to gender bias and doesn't aim to cover  all challenges of NMT, nor to be prescriptive in determining the optimal approach to  address gender bias. This dataset and the research behind it aim to foster progress on  this challenge across the global research community.
2022 AI Principles Progress Update12 Case study: A more inclusive and equitable skin tone scale The Challenge Skin tone plays a key role in how we experience and are treated in the world, and  factors into how we interact with technologies. Studies30 show that products built  using today’s artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technologies  can perpetuate unfair biases and not work well for people with darker skin tones.  Computer vision (CV) is a type of AI that allows computers to “see and understand”  images of people and environments, but when present-day systems aren’t designed  with everyone in mind, they may not “see” and “understand” people with darker  skin. Building more inclusive CV systems requires being intentional — from collecting  representative datasets for training and evaluation, to developing the right evaluation  metrics, to building features that work for all users. In 2018, the pioneering Gender  Shades31 study demonstrated that commercial, facial-analysis APIs perform  substantially worse on images of people of color and women. Gender Shades evaluated  API performance across genders and skin tones, as well as intersectionality between  the two. Findings from the study inspired members of the AI community to explore  more inclusive CV systems and develop best practices for measuring, improving, and  documenting how models and datasets represent skin tone. The Approach But how do we categorize the continuous spectrum of skin tones from all around the  world into meaningful categories that work for evaluating and addressing fairness 
13 2022 AI Principles Progress Updateconsiderations? This is a question that Google asked over the last two years. To date,  the de-facto tech industry standard32 for categorizing skin tone has been the 6-point  Fitzpatrick Scale.33 Developed in 1975 by Harvard dermatologist Thomas Fitzpatrick, the  Fitzpatrick Scale was originally designed to assess UV sensitivity of different skin types  for dermatological purposes. As a result, the scale skews towards lighter tones, which  tend to be more UV-sensitive. While this scale may work for dermatological use cases,  relying on the Fitzpatrick Scale for ML development has resulted in unintended bias that  excludes darker tones.34 Google Researchers reached out to Dr. Ellis Monk — an Associate Professor of Sociology  at Harvard University, whose research35 focuses on social inequalities with respect to  colorism to address these biases. To develop a more representative scale, he leveraged  his extensive research on skin tone and colorism in the U.S.36 and Brazil.37 His research  focuses on how varying geographic exposure to UV radiation yields different skin  tone distributions within and across ethnoracial populations. Dr. Monk consulted with  experts in social psychology and social categorization, as well as underrepresented  communities, to learn how they perceived the scale. Dr. Monk’s research resulted in the Monk Skin Tone (MST) Scale — a more inclusive 10tone scale explicitly designed to represent a broader range of skin tones. The MST Scale  is used by the National Institute of Health (NIH) and the University of Chicago’s National  Opinion Research Center,38 and is now available39 to the entire ML community. The MST  Scale can be leveraged to evaluate datasets and ML models for better representation  of people with darker skin. This year, Google's Research Center for Responsible AI  and Human-Centered Technology partnered with Dr. Monk to begin to use the scale  internally, with the plan to openly release the MST Scale for the larger ML community. By  openly releasing the scale to the broader industry, we aim to make it possible for others  to incorporate the scale into their development processes, so that ML practitioners can  collectively improve this area of AI, globally. In order to validate the Monk Skin Tone Scale for ML purposes, researchers working on  skin tone fairness in Google Research launched a study within the U.S. that’s now under  peer review. The study’s goal was to understand how well participants across diverse  communities felt their own skin tone was represented within the scale, helping to identify  whether ML fairness efforts with this categorization could uncover and address potential  biases faced across populations. ML fairness40 evaluations prevent common human  biases from inadvertently getting reproduced by ML algorithms.
2022 AI Principles Progress Update14Study participants found the MST Scale to be more inclusive than the Fitzpatrick Scale  and better at representing their skin tone. They also evaluated the MST Scale as being  as representative of their skin tone as a 40 point beauty palette used by an industryleading cosmetic brand, known for their inclusivity. Larger scales like these can be  challenging for ML use cases, because of the difficulty of applying that many tones  consistently across a wide variety of content, while maintaining statistical significance in  evaluations. For example, it can become difficult for human annotators to differentiate  subtle variation in skin tone in images captured in poor lighting conditions. The Outcome The MST Scale transforms the continuous skin tone spectrum into 10 tones that introduce  enough granularity to reflect a diversity of skin tones, without increasing complexity,  enabling ML training and evaluation. To improve CV systems’ understanding of skin tones  and improve ML fairness evaluation, we’re open-sourcing the MST. Internally, we are now  using the MST Scale in numerous products, including Pixel 7, Photos, and Image Search.  For example, when global users make makeup-related queries in Google Images, they  now see an option to further refine Search results by skin tone.  We continue to collaborate with Dr. Monk on refining the scale. We encourage ML fairness  researchers, developers, and our users to offer feedback41 on how we can improve the  scale and develop our ML models responsibly, in line with Google’s AI Principles.
15 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateIn addition to designing and launching our education offerings, the central AI Principles  operations team manages an internal hub of self-service content  about how to put the  AI Principles into practice. These include case studies and streamlined information about  various services. The hub is the main entry point for requests for ethical reviews of new  AI applications  by the central AI Principles operations team. Finally, to complement existing review procedures and frameworks, we offer a bespoke  Moral Imagination workshop  for product and research teams. The workshop enables  ethical awareness and deliberation on topics relevant to AI-enabled features and  product development, early on in a team’s project planning process. It’s been a year  since we first piloted the workshop with 15 teams, and we’ve learned that the workshop  provides a useful bridge for those who have taken existing training modules, such as our  introductions to AI Principles or tech ethics, helping them to apply their knowledge to the  work they face daily with their team. We’ve found that creating this space can help engineers and product managers create  a mental model for how, when, and why other AI ethics resources, such as technical  tools or consultations on fairness, can help, and to support a team culture of ethical  decision making. Through the 34 workshops delivered to date, feedback from workshop  participants shows that the sessions influenced product and research strategies, and  measurement of the ethical strategies’ effectiveness. Third Pillar: Structures and processes Our third pillar of AI governance consists of the structures and processes through  which we evaluate and guide our development and use of AI. We use a risk-based  approach that focuses reviews in the areas they are most needed at any given time.  This includes sensitive topics that change over time depending on emerging cultural or  technical issues. Current examples include AI-enabled surveillance and the creation of  AI-generated synthetic media often termed “fake news. ” With our AI Principles process,  we are able to assemble a diverse set of stakeholders to ensure we consider a variety of  perspectives and effectively manage risks. Risk Assessment This year, the central AI Principles operations team adopted an updated risk  assessment framework  (RAF) to help (1) identify, measure, and analyze ethical risks  throughout the life of an AI-powered product, (2) map these risks to appropriate  mitigations, and (3) develop clearer standards of acceptable risk. This updated RAF now also draws upon the best practices of Google’s cross-company  Office of Compliance and Integrity and Enterprise Risk Management efforts, and is  aligned with upcoming regulatory requirements in the U.S. and E.U. With an AI Principles RAF grounded in research and a nuanced sociotechnical harms  taxonomy (discussed below), we are embedding ethical risk management into Google’s 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update16processes. AI Principles reviewers provide launch guidance. Depending on the product  area, this may include approval, approval with recommendations, or more holistic rework  depending on the risks identified within the framework. Our AI Principles reviews and consultations prioritize the evaluation of AI's impact on  humans and the environment in which a product is likely to operate. Risk is a function  of the magnitude of the harm multiplied by its likelihood and frequency. Inherent risk  is the amount of risk in existence absent the effect of the control environment. We ask  reviewers to consider both the impact of a risk (e.g., sociotechnical harm), and the  probability (likelihood, frequency) of occurrence. Inherent risk is useful in measuring and  prioritizing the actual or prospective impact of a risk exposure. When thinking about the  overall potential benefit and risks of harms, we also consider the harm of not launching  a new technology or application, i.e., whether it might address a current harm or issues  that could remain unaddressed if we did not launch it. For example, health-related AI  applications, such as those that help medical specialists in diagnosing disease, might  raise questions of potential fairness, privacy, or other concerns. But that must be  weighed against the value of delivering solutions to a market or population that may  benefit from innovations to long-standing medical challenges. The AI Principles RAF serves as a foundational support to enable product-specific AI  Principles reviews. These reviews gather detailed risk information to inform and provide  context for central AI Principles reviews and other pre-launch reviews that may be  necessary. Our related harms taxonomy draws from a systematic scoping review of crossdisciplinary research, including academia, NGOs, and government documentation and  guidance, which help define and describe potential harms from algorithmic systems.  Developing the taxonomy involved social scientists, researchers, AI ethics program  managers, and engineers, and reflects hundreds of analyses drawn from AI Principles  reviews and consultations with product teams by ethics reviewers on the central  operations team with multidisciplinary expertise including ethics, philosophy, human  rights, user experience research, design, engineering, linguistics, law, and trust and  safety. The RAF and the harms taxonomy help to set clear expectations for product teams,  scale company-level consistency, equip AI Principles reviewers with proactive risk and  harm identification and response strategies, and enable decision-makers to arrive at  stronger risk-based and remediation-driven outcomes. Alignment of Principles and Reviews In addition, we have more directly aligned our AI Principles review process with Google’s  general machine learning (ML) workflow for developers. This strategic approach has 
17 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatehelped us to operationalize our capabilities for preventing, identifying, and mitigating  responsible AI concerns (such as unfair bias) by advising teams as they are: • Defining the problem that ML will solve • Constructing or preparing data • Building and training the model • Evaluating its performance • Integrating it into products and services • Monitoring ML performance There are some variations for specific product areas with customized AI ethics reviews,  such as Cloud, Devices and Services, and Health. Cloud’s Responsible AI governance  process, for example, has two different types of assessments tailored to Cloud’s AI  development processes and enterprise contexts, from healthcare and finance to retail  and entertainment. Reviews team This year, the central AI Principles reviews team  conducted hundreds of ethics  reviews across research and products, including proposals for future AI applications  and datasets for training or evaluating ML models. In 2022, teams representing flagship  products, including the Assistant, Ads, YouTube, and Search requested AI Principles  reviews. Reviews spanned across large language models, datasets, community  responsibility, content quality, and region-specific fairness issues in India, among other  topics. ProFair’s AI Principles consultations with product teams this year have explored  potential fairness issues in models and products that utilize text and image generation,  person and object detection, and classification functions for teams across Google. The  majority of reviews are approved for launch if the reviewers’ suggestions are applied.  For datasets and models, the consistent outcome is to create and publish detailed  documentation of datasets and models in the form of structured transparency artifacts  known as data and model cards (see the following section for details), which function  like nutrition labels, providing information such as the provenance of the data (if a data  card) and model performance when tested for fairness (if a model card). Some AI launches, such as the AI Test Kitchen,42 an online space for people outside  of Google to try experimental applications utilizing LaMDA ( “Language Model  for Dialogue Applications ”), entailed multiple reviews. We are taking a careful  approach with LaMDA to consider valid concerns about fairness, factuality, and  anthropomorphization  (the tendency for humans to see human traits in inanimate 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update18objects or technologies). To date, LaMDA has gone through eleven distinct AI Principles  reviews,43 along with rigorous research and testing based on key metrics of quality,  safety, and the system’s ability to produce statements grounded in facts. A research  paper44 released earlier this year details the work that goes into the responsible  development of LaMDA. In addition, we applied our risk framework: 
19 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateEmerging Framework for Applications We Will Not Pursue:  Surveillance To help AI Principles reviewers evaluate technology and research in the context of  the four AI Applications We Will Not Pursue, which we publicly state alongside our AI  Principles, we create guidelines based on trends in our growing library of cases, external  research, and subject matter and community expertise.  This year we have been iterating and piloting a new Google-wide framework to inform  the responsible development of applications that gather and use information within  internationally accepted norms for socially beneficial uses of surveillance technologies.  This emerging framework was pivotal in understanding and articulating how social  benefit outweighs the potential for harm for the AI Principles review of Dynamic World,45  a dataset that uses machine learning to enable near real-time measurement of land  cover and land use, intended for positive environmental and social impact research  and featured at I/O46 this year. Dynamic World uses Google Earth Engine , combining  satellite imagery and geospatial datasets with planetary-scale analysis capabilities. Even with use cases like that of Dynamic World, considerations about surveillance can  arise. There is often international disagreement about what counts as surveillance. Social  norms are shifting at an even faster pace, sometimes leaving governments looking to the  private sector as a guide for precedents to serve as guidelines. In fact, the very concept  of “norms” can mean different things to different people across cultural, regional, and  temporal contexts.  So, in 2022 we explored: 1. What a relevant international norm is, outside of the broad “big brother” definition 2. The intersections of surveillance with other AI Principles considerations, such as  privacy, human rights, and downstream harm 3. When conventional applications’ gathering of data might be acceptable for particular  use cases It was critical not only to work through these complex issues based on our internal  understanding, but also to seek objectivity and learned expertise by engaging with  external experts. Working with Google's internal Human Rights team and the external  experts at Business for Social Responsibility (BSR),47 which specializes in business and  human rights, we conducted a landscape assessment of ethical standards and norms .  One of Google's key findings was the minimum set of norms any acceptable use of 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update20surveillance technology must meet to be consistent with our privacy, human rights and  ethical obligations. These include the widely known tenets of human rights: legitimacy,  legality, necessity, and proportionality. Framework for reviews These findings helped inform our framework for assessing the Surveillance Application  We Will not Pursue as part of our AI Principles reviews. The emerging guidelines consists  of 3 steps: 1. Review the End Use : Surveillance can manifest in different ways and therefore  have different implications, which include categories such as targeted, mass, or  indiscriminate surveillance. There are also several types of surveillance, such as tech  that is used at home, in the workplace, or in public settings, and that collect video,  audio, or other forms of data. Considerations vary depending on the end use, which  impacts the types and potential for harm that must be assessed. 2. Review the User : Often, use cases involve tensions between conflicting rights Google’s central Responsible Innovation team is piloting a framework to support AI Principles reviewers when they assess new AI  projects at Google that raise potential surveillance issues  �overnment Public SectorPrivate  Sector/  Compan�IndividualReview the End Use Review the User Determine Imp acts and Appropriate Mitigation Measures1 2 3Appl� relevant principles and consideration for each  of the respective user groups Framework for ethical review of AI applications with  surveillance concerns
21 2022 AI Principles Progress Updateof users, such as between security and privacy. For example, during states of  emergencies such as the COVID-19 pandemic, some governmental forms of  surveillance might be more acceptable than during normal times for public health  reasons, such as contact tracing. However, transparency and oversight are also  critical factors, and explanations of AI-enabled surveillance should be easy for users  to access and to understand. 3. Mitigations : A layer of safeguards, including guidance on how to design, use, and  interpret outputs, can be implemented during the design, development or pre-launch  phases. For example, model and data cards can help make potential surveillance  related implications transparent. Ultimately, mitigating harmful forms of surveillance  requires taking a multi-faceted approach to safeguarding users and society. The first  layer of protection consists of preventative measures, such as specifying contract  terms which could include feature restrictions such as mandatory face blurring.  Then, ongoing ethics assessments or engaging with independent third parties to  track, monitor, and report the use of technologies can be highly valuable in nascent  socio-technical domains such as surveillance. As part of our emerging framework for assessing the risk of surveillance that may violate  international norms, we have customized our three-pronged mitigation strategy :  Prevent, Mitigate, and Track. This can support a product team’s efforts to address any  issues before a launch. PREVENT: Scope and Terms MITIGATE: Partnership, Guidance, and Training TRACK: Ongoing Review Determining scope of use or terms of use that  are rights-respectingWorking to design, develop, and deploy technology  in a rights-respecting mannerReviewing effectiveness of prevention and mitigation  measures over time • Specific contract terms which may include  feature restrictions of technical limitations  (such as mandatory face blurring) • Operational grievance mechanisms and/or  channels to report misuse of the technology • Quality assurance (QA) procedures to verify  that input data is representative and not  biased or incomplete • QA procedures to identify potential unfair  bias in the technology's design, testing,  development, deployment, and/or outcomes • Algorithims that are explainable, and/or  subject to independent assessment/audits • Restrictions on adjacent/similar use cases that  are known to violate human rights standards• Technical limitations or restrictions • Training, guidance, and direction for human  operators on how to design, use, and interpret  outputs • Work with users to conduct human rights due  diligence before deployment • Mitigations that adequately address potential  harms caused by error• Review cycles that assess whether the technology  is being used as intended and without adverse  human rights impacts. May include securing  feedback from the user, affected rights holders,  stakeholder organizations, and other experts. • Partnering with independent organizations to track/ monitor/report on the use of technology • Review of how adequately mitigations address  potential harms. Google’s central Responsible Innovation team is piloting a 3-part mitigation strategy to support product teams to  consider potential surveillance concerns early in the product development lifecycle
2022 AI Principles Progress Update22Resources, research, tools, and  responsible practices Twenty years ago, Google started using machine learning. Eleven years ago, machine  learning, especially the sort known as deep learning, helped us achieve rapid progress  in AI development. Our Research teams have long been at the forefront of technical  AI innovation. Today, we are reinventing innovation itself by focusing on responsible  practices in AI research and responsible product development. At Google, researchers have frameworks and processes that enable them to confidently  pursue and then publish research incorporating best practices for responsible AI (RAI).  And our AI development teams design, and then deploy, tools that help them quickly  identify and consistently remediate known problems such as unfair bias in datasets and  models, so that research can be published, externalized, and incorporated into products  responsibly. Responsible AI Research Our researchers continue to present at leading conferences around the world, including  the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition conference ( CVPR), the Association for  Computing Machinery Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ( FAccT) conference,  the Conference on Neural Information and Processing Systems ( NeurIPS ), and more. In 2022, we published 166 papers, on notable topics such as achieving robustness48  and trustworthiness in large-scale ML models,49 maintaining fairness in real-world uses  of ML,50 bringing impacted communities into AI research and development,51 ensuring  that AI is culturally competent,52 and enabling new approaches to prototyping humancentered AI.53 Adversarial testing In lockstep with Google’s central operations team and processes for AI Principles  reviews and governance as described in the previous section, our research teams  often begin the RAI evaluation process of their technical work early in the product  development lifecycle and the ML workflow, using adversarial testing — stress testing a  model or product to probe it for errors and harms. To conduct adversarial testing well,  we’ve learned to employ a variety of techniques: • Leverage social & cultural experts : Google has built the ProFair team (as  described earlier), to create a centralized experience in adversarial testing that  incorporates global perspectives. • Engage testers from historically marginalized backgrounds : Whether testing  with Googlers via Google’s Product Inclusion and Equity team in partnership with 
23 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatevolunteers from Google’s Employee Resource Groups, or with a trusted external  vendor, the diversity of our testers is critical to ensuring models are assessed  across a wide spectrum of use-cases, scenarios, and values. We also practice  thoughtful, inclusive, and equitable task design to guide humans who label  data in datasets (also known as raters), in order to achieve high quality and fair  evaluations. • Synthetic data : We can’t always scale up the number of human testers to get  reliable enough results. DeepMind has made major advances54 in using machine  learning to generate synthetic data and adversarial datasets, which can preserve  privacy (e.g., not require gathering personal information), offer a source of largescale, representative data needed for model training, and provide other benefits. • Data quality/coverage : One often-overlooked aspect of adversarial testing is  data quality. Especially with data generated by humans, the adversarial test cases  can lack diversity. This can translate into poor test coverage in which some areas  are not sufficiently covered, resulting in failures that may only be discovered in  production or after deployment. One of our current focus areas is researching high  quality analytics to characterize adversarial prompts for large models and their  outputs. Tools We’ve continued to develop and update our suite of RAI tools, which we make available  to the public. This year, we integrated the Model Remediation library ,55 which provides techniques  for addressing bias and fairness issues in models, into our internal ML platform for  automating common ML workflows across the company; it is also available publicly.  The Learning Interpretability Tool (LIT) ,56 an updated version of the Language  Interpretability Tool that we released this year, identifies how different inputs affect  an ML prediction, can trace an error back to the training data, and can even measure  correlations within a model. It is already being used to improve our ML models for  Search. The updated LIT tool can now handle 10x the number of data sizes LIT used in  the past. Internally, researchers use tools we’ve developed such as Know Your Data  (KYD),57  which was first piloted last year. This year, we released a catalog of 70+ datasets on the  tool’s public-facing web site. KYD can help with responsible data analysis for ML training  and evaluation sets, centering on four concepts: 1. The provenance of the data: Where did it come from? 2. The content of the data: What’s in it?
2022 AI Principles Progress Update243. The associations among sensitive content in the data: What is associated with what? 4. The labels of the data: Types and categories of the data These four analytic concepts are focused on the downstream harms identified in the  research literature, and are useful for coming up with recommendations such as data  filtering or simply flagging results for documentation. An example data analysis of  Language Models can be found in a recent paper we published on scaling language  modeling with PaLM.58 Datasets Our Research team is also building high-quality datasets  to meet product needs where  existing datasets are inadequate, including by leveraging third-party datasets and  partnerships. Our dataset generation projects include: • Building a new image dataset centering on a diverse representation of subjects for  internal product fairness testing and development • Creating internal synthetic datasets, built with privacy top of mind and with an  emphasis on photographs that are inclusive • Creating an externally available Wikipedia dataset to help avoid unfair gender bias Understanding context Our emerging best practices for responsible AI require a clear articulation of the broader  societal context into which the technology may be deployed. This includes considering  unfair biases, unjust impacts, and the norms and values in the real world situations  in which ML models will operate. These best practices will form the basis for RAI  capabilities. Societal knowledge is gathered and organized through various research and knowledge  production efforts across our Research teams and the Office of Compliance and  Integrity. The Societal Context Understanding Tools and Solutions (SCOUTS)59  research initiative provides people and ML systems with the scalable, trustworthy  societal context knowledge required to realize responsible and robust AI. This year,  the SCOUTS Societal Context Repository  (SCR) has shown it can help improve tools  Google has shared with the world to enable responsible AI practices in important areas  such as content moderation. Jigsaw,60 Google’s incubator for building technology  that explores solutions to threats to open societies, used the SCR's knowledge base  to supplement and balance datasets prior to model training for Perspective API ,61  a product used to identify toxic content in online comments. As a result, terms used  for bias mitigation are fresher and have greater coverage. Additionally, the entire bias  mitigation process is more scalable.62 Perspective API is used by trusted news and 
25 2022 AI Principles Progress Updateinformation organizations around the world, including Wired, the New York Times , El Pais ,  and Le Monde . Transparency artifacts Our researchers continue to iterate on designs for new transparency artifacts to  accompany our datasets, including ones that are specific to particular sectors. For  example, Healthsheets63 are a contextualized adaptation of the original datasheet  questionnaire for health-specific applications. These complement other structured transparency artifacts, such as model cards .  Examples of externally available model and data cards for recent Google large models  include the Parti/Imagen data card64 and PaLM datasheet and model card.65 We recently launched The Data Cards Playbook ,66 free online guidance from the  People + AI Research (PAIR) team. It’s based on workshops we conducted at major AI  conferences such as FAccT on how to create structured transparency artifacts to ensure  data excellence: data that is clean, representative, and fit for purpose. Google’s People + AI Research team launched the Data Cards Playbook ( https://pair-code.github.io/ datacardsplaybook/ ) in 2022. The Playbook helps teams create structured transparency artifacts for datasets. 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update26Benchmarks Benchmarks play an important role in the RAI process for generative models that  produce text outputs, images, music, and the like. Benchmarks discover areas that need  fine tuning, can lead to the development of tools needed by downstream users, and  establish measurable RAI baselines for comparing and understanding the strengths and  weaknesses of machine learning systems. This year we’ve updated our RAI language  benchmarking capabilities  to include measurements related to toxic language, unfair  discrimination, and expressions of stereotypes or other forms of marginalization. We  also developed benchmarks for text-to-image generation tasks to include sensitivity to  changes in context and style of images. Responsible Generation Responsible generation  refers to methods that help control the outputs of generative  models so that they better meet some responsibility goals. For example, we may not  want a chatbot to reply with toxic language, even if coaxed. There are a number of recent advances that are very promising for responsible  generation that we are exploring for applications of new generative models like PaLM: •  There has been an explosion in research into how to prompt language-driven  models such as DALL-E, Imagen, GPT3, and PaLM to help control or improve  the models' output. For example, Google's discovery of “chain of thought”67  prompting has illustrated how including the reasoning steps can significantly  improve language models responses. Methods to search for prompts have also  been used to identify what kinds of prompts lead to unintended model behavior.68 •  A particularly exciting and relatively new approach to control, that goes beyond  using prompt-text, is called parameter efficient tuning . It has recently been  shown that small datasets can be used to tune a special input to a model that  results in significantly better control.69 Another significant branch of work to control language models focuses on fine-grained  control of the output, instead of the inputs. For example, methods have been developed  to reduce the likelihood of toxic outputs70 and more recently to mitigate unintended  biases.71 Technical Guidance: Responsible AI Product Maturity Model Assessment To help scale responsible AI emerging best practices and to monitor and control model  performance over time, our Responsible AI and Human Centered Technology (RAI-HCT)  team, which focuses on the technical realization of the AI Principles, developed and  internally deployed the Product Maturity Model Assessment (PMMA)  in June.72
27 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateThe PMMA helps teams across Google who leverage machine learning in their products  to: •  Understand the RAI domain and its emerging best practices and tools • Measure the maturity of their ML models and use cases • Proactively improve the maturity of their ML models (i.e., achieve desired RAI  outcomes) and use cases over time The PMMA centers on an extensive questionnaire with technical and application-specific  questions based on the current responsible practices in the field of AI research and  development. These questions were sourced from the latest research in the emerging  academic field of responsible AI, both internal and external to Google, along with  emerging RAI best practices currently being implemented by Google product teams.  A cross-functional team of research scientists, engineers, product managers, user  experience specialists, technical writers, and program managers generate and refresh  these PMMA questions to reflect new advances in technical knowledge. The PMMA is designed to gauge adoption of state-of-the-art RAI practices that reflect  the AI Principles. It maps survey results against a maturity model framework that is  prescriptive in nature, with clear courses of action provided to help teams improve their  ML models from one maturity level to the next one. Teams access their PMMA results  via interactive dashboards and visualization tools, and can apply this critical input when  adjusting their ML models and more closely aligning them with the AI Principles. In addition to understanding where their ML models need to improve, product teams  that have taken the PMMA consistently ask for concrete steps on how to start and  maintain responsible practices over time. To meet that need and enable RAI across  Google, we are building out a library of relevant technical guidance  documents and  tooling. We are also creating a centralized technical infrastructure  that will eventually  automate most of the RAI technical tasks that underlie our PMMA questions, allowing  product teams to conduct these tasks in a manner that is repeatable, accurate, and built  for scale.
2022 AI Principles Progress Update28Product Impact There are three tiers of complementary, company-wide governance structures in place  to put the AI Principles into practice for all teams building products across Google.  The first tier exists within product teams themselves. Product teams include dedicated  user experience (UX), privacy, and trust and safety (T&S) experts, providing deep  functional expertise consistent with the AI Principles. The second tier is the set of dedicated review bodies and expert teams. This includes  the central AI Principles team in the Office of Compliance and Integrity, discussed earlier  in this report. It also includes specialized reviewers with expertise in specific areas,  such as Cloud, with expertise in enterprise AI offerings, and Devices and Services,  with expertise on how AI is used responsibly within hardware. There is also a Health  Ethics Committee that reviews health and medical-related AI and ML research and  development across the company. All Google employees are encouraged to engage  with the AI Principles review processes throughout the project development lifecycle.  In addition, the Privacy Advisory Council (PAC) reviews all projects for potential privacy  concerns, including (but not exclusively) issues related to AI. The third tier of our AI governance structure is the Advanced Technology Review Council  (ATRC), a rotating committee of senior product, research, and business executives.  This Council represents a broad cross-section of Google. The ATRC addresses complex  cases that could affect multiple products, or set a precedent because the technology  is so new. The Council also makes decisions on urgent escalations, and establishes  There are dedicated functions that support responsible AI practices embedded within Google’s product teams. Google further  operationalizes these practices across the company via a three-tiered internal AI Principles Ecosystem.
29 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatecompany-wide policies impacting multiple product areas. This involves making  challenging decisions that require deeply considering the trade offs between ethical  risks of certain new applications and potential business opportunities, prioritizing social  benefit. For example, this year, the ATRC completed two reviews of LaMDA, deciding to  prioritize rigorous, responsible generative AI development , testing, and guardrails  above speeding the technology to market. Directly or indirectly, our responsible AI research, training, and tools were important  contributors to ensuring that the AI Principles are comprehensively reflected within the  wide spectrum of product innovations we announced throughout the year. For Example: AIP #1: Be socially beneficial. This principle helps us think through how the overall  benefits of AI exceed risks, including potential privacy or other concerns. Because we  are an information company, we strive to use advanced AI to help people who use our  products and services make high-quality content available. In 2022, the spread of misinformation  has been a growing global challenge. Because  of the amount of misinformation that’s created and the speed with which it spreads, it  seems like a natural for an AI-based solution…or at least a mitigation. But, for that we  would need a large training dataset of expertly-curated misinformation. To help address  this — as we’ve outlined on YouTube’s blog73 — we’re continuously training YouTube ’s  system on new data that’s been collected responsibly and with clear user policies for  gathering informed consent. YouTube is looking to leverage an even more targeted  mix of classifiers, keywords in additional languages, and information from regional  analysts to identify narratives our main classifiers don’t catch. Over time, this will make  YouTube faster and more accurate at catching viral misinformation narratives. YouTube  is also working on ways to update models more often in order to catch hyperlocal  misinformation, with the capability to support local languages. We also look for opportunities to support humanitarian uses of AI. For example, to help  refugees and veterans of the war in Ukraine, we updated Look to Speak ,74 an Android  app that allows people to use their eyes to select pre-written phrases and have them  spoken aloud in 18 languages, to include Ukrainian. As a broad approach to social benefit, this year we launched AI for the Global Goals,75 an  initiative to bring together research, technology, and funding to accelerate progress on  the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This commitment will include  $25 million to support NGOs and social enterprises working with AI to accelerate  progress towards the SDGs . Based on what we’ve learned so far, we believe that with  the AI capabilities and financial support we will provide, grantees can cut in half the  time or cost to achieve their goals . We’ll also provide Google.org Fellowships, where 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update30teams of Google employees work alongside organizations for up to six months. AIP #2: Avoid creating or reinforcing unfair bias. Unfair bias exists in the world, and  datasets and models could reflect these, including unintentionally. This principle helps  us consider from the earliest ideation stage how to harness AI so we can truly build for  everyone, and for cultures around the world. We continue to create new programs to address emerging challenges in fairness. For  example, the recently launched Equitable Automated Speech Recognition program   at Google aims to identify and eradicate unfair biases in voice technologies.76 As a company with the mission of making the world's information universally accessible  and useful, a more global approach to enabling communication for more people across  the world — no matter their language or abilities — was a clear focus of some of our  biggest product announcements. The Project Relate  app, which helps improve communications for those with impaired  speech, has expanded globally and is now available in the U.S., Canada, Australia, New  Zealand, India, and Ghana.77 We also expanded Project Euphonia , a research initiative  that works with community organizations and people with speech impairments to create  more inclusive speech recognition models. This year we added French, Hindi, Japanese  and Spanish.78 We also launched the 1,000 Language Initiative79 to support the 1,000 most-spoken  languages in the world, using our universal speech model trained on more than 400  languages — the largest language coverage in a speech model to date. We also used  ML to add 24 new languages to Translate,80 a technical milestone for Google Translate ,  for these are the first languages we’ve added using Zero-Shot Machine Translation,  which can be trained using texts only in the new language, without translations from that  language. This will enable Google to accelerate its addition of new languages, especially  ones with relatively few translated texts available. This will help give voice to the world’s  less-heard populations. AIP #3: Be built and tested for safety.  We design our AI systems with strong security  practices, to avoid user harms — including those from unintended uses or results. For  example, starting in March of this year, Chrome rolled out a new ML model that identifies  2.5 times more potentially malicious sites and phishing attacks as the previous model —  resulting in a safer and more secure web.81  AIP #4: Be accountable to people.  Using our emerging practices for designing  human-centered AI systems as captured in the public-facing People + AI Research  Guidebook  — which we first released in 2019 and update regularly — we design AI  systems with humans in the loop, clear opportunities for user feedback, relevant  explanations, and appeal.82 This year, we expanded upon our offerings in UX by 
31 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatelaunching a Google-wide Explainability course, which we also presented externally.83 AIP#5: Incorporate privacy by design principles . To safeguard users’ privacy, we  apply Google’s cross-company privacy principles, which pre-date the AI Principles.  This year, we announced several new uses of on-device models to keep information  private, one of our main proactive practices across Google and in alignment with our  AI Principles. These ranged from more convenient transcription options in Pixel 7’s  Recorder feature84 to Web browsing with minimal interruption via a new system for more  relevant permission prompts in Chrome.85 We continue to use other privacy design strategies, too. For example, for a pilot to  update Google Maps86 with updated speed limit information, Google requests photos  from trusted third-party imagery partners that already gather roadway imagery to  improve delivery routes. Those photos are of specific stretches of road that also include  a speed limit sign. If the partner has this photo available, we then use a combination of  AI and help from our operations team to identify the sign in the image, and extract the  new speed limit information to add to Google Maps. We reference only images taken on  public roads, and partners are required to blur identifying information such as faces and  license plates. For an extra layer of privacy, we blur the photo again when we receive it  and delete the photo after we use it to update the map. And at the I/O conference, we announced that when user information is sent to  Google’s servers, more of it will be anonymized through techniques including the use of  differential privacy and edge computing.87 AIP #6: Uphold high standards of scientific excellence . Innovation in AI, or in  any technical field, is rooted in the scientific method, requiring intellectual rigor,  multidisciplinary collaboration, and knowledge sharing. Google and our parent company Alphabet have continued to be important contributors  of scientific research in papers, with topics on AI that range from applying neural  networks to restore ancient texts to integrating deep learning for disease detection, as  evidenced by our place in the top 5 of global corporate research in the 2022 Nature   index.88 To make our responsible AI research more accessible and findable, in early 2022, we  curated a dedicated external collection of more than 200 research papers focused on  the topic of Responsible AI.89 AIP #7: Be made available for uses that accord with these principles . As we  develop AI, we utilize this principle to determine how to limit any potentially harmful  deployments, including how the AI could be adapted. We also consider our role  in providing general-purpose tools, as well as developing custom AI solutions, or  integrating tools for our enterprise or other customers.
2022 AI Principles Progress Update32Our responsible AI approach prioritizes in-depth evaluations during development and  guidance for our enterprise customers once implemented so they can safely build  and deploy applications using Google Cloud, accounting for their unique social and  organizational contexts. For example, to align Cloud’s Vertex AI Vision90 with the AI  Principles, the Cloud Responsible AI team conducted an evaluation and incorporated  mitigations for risk concerns and education opportunities, including: • Evaluating and testing for unfair bias during development • Developing product features to enhance privacy and limit personal identification • Increasing product documentation and transparency to support customers’  responsible use Google Cloud’s Vertex AI Vision was evaluated by Cloud’s Responsible AI review team for unfair bias, privacy and transparency  before launch.
33 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateSupporting global dialogue, standards,  and policy Practicing responsible AI research and development requires a collective approach, so it  is vital to share learnings and receive feedback on our progress from the world’s larger  AI ecosystem. We continue to develop publicly available content that explains how the AI in our core  products and services work, in the tradition of How Search Works91 and How YouTube  Works.92 We realize raising awareness is the first step in supporting international  conversations about responsible AI. So we share our learnings and emerging best  practices via free, online educational content and programs. This year, we increased our AI Principles online courses and other educational programs  for a wide-range of external audiences. These include: • “Discover AI in Daily Life, ”93 a course designed with middle and high school  students in mind from Applied Digital Skills,94 Google’s free, online, video-based  curriculum (and part of the larger Grow with Google95 initiative) explains how AI  is built, how it helps people every day, and the potential challenges AI faces and  poses. Building AI literacy is an important component of accountability, as it helps  prepare people to participate in civic discussion and understand explanations in  products.96 The lesson has over 68,000 unique users to date. •  A new external training, “Responsible AI: Applying AI Principles with Google  Cloud ”97 is designed to provide a framework for any organization interested in  operationalizing responsible AI practices. •  To make our research more accessible and useful, we launched an interactive  scientific article98 where people can play with our ML models — getting results in  real time, in their web browser, with no setup required. We continue to support academic and research partnerships and fellowships to increase  diversity, equity, and inclusion in the field of computer science. Highlights from this year  include: •  Serving as a founding partner of the inaugural African Master of Machine  Intelligence (AMMI)  program. Many AMMI graduates have continued their studies  or taken positions in industry,99 including at our Accra Research Center where we  offer an AI residency program. We've had three cohorts of AI residents to date. •  Launching Google’s first-ever PhD Fellowships for students attending Latin  American universities. Selected Fellows receive $15,000 of funding for up to  three years, and mentorship from a Google researcher to support their career 
2022 AI Principles Progress Update34development in Computer Science Research. •  Expanding the Responsible Innovation Fellowship100 program from an internal  Google fellowship program to a 5-week external program that equips students with  the knowledge and skills they need to enter the field of AI ethics. Students from  currently underrepresented backgrounds — including students from U.S. Minority  Serving Institutions, such as Historically Black Colleges & Universities, HispanicServing Institutions, and Historically Women’s Colleges — are encouraged to apply.  The inaugural cohort engaged twenty students.101 • Announcing a $20 million commitment to expand CS education  access to more  than 11 million students across the U.S. This brings our total commitment to CS  education to more than $240 million since 2004.102 • Hosting the largest cohort of Google’s CS Research Mentorship Program   (CSRMP),103 to date, with 300 students in 2022. CSRMP aims to increase the  diversity of PhD graduates in computing-related fields and ensure the broader  community of CS researchers includes the experiences, perspectives, and concerns  of people worldwide. Since 2018, CSRMP has hosted more than 730 students across  more than 230 institutions.104 • Developing a business school case study  on operationalizing AI Principles  targeted for future technology industry decision-makers, in partnership with the  California Management Review .105 The case is now taught in multiple courses on AI  and ethics at the University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business. • Investing in the launch of INSAIT ,106 the Institute for Computer Science, Artificial  Intelligence and Technology, a new AI and computer science research institute in  Bulgaria, backed by the Bulgarian government with an endowment fund of nearly  $100 million.107 Its research will include machine learning, quantum computing,  information security, robotics, and more. Google is investing $3 million over the  next three years to provide INSAIT with cloud computing resources and access to  Tensor Processing Unit Research Cloud,108 a specialized infrastructure for running  high-performance machine learning models. •  Collaborating on the See It, Be It: What Families are Seeing on TV  study and  report109 to analyze trends in the screen and speaking time of characters based  on their perceived gender, skin tone, and age, in scripted television over the last  12 years. The research was led by the Geena Davis Institute on Gender in Media,110  in partnership with Google Research as the technology provider, and the Signal  Analysis and Interpretation Laboratory111 at the University of Southern California as  the academic advisor. Together, we applied a new skin tone classifier based on the  MST Monk Skin Tone Scale to study representation patterns in a socio-technical 
35 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatesystem, to examine representation in Nielsen’s top 10 scripted U.S. TV shows for  each season from 2010 to 2021. We also take a holistic approach to prepare more people for future careers in the AI  industry around the world, even if they are not formally studying or have never studied  computer science or programming: •  In the U.K., we announced a partnership with Girlguiding112 that will provide  nearly 400,000 girls training in concepts such as coding and algorithms, with  new activities co-created by Google’s women engineers. The new activities will  form part of Girlguiding’s national program within the Skills for my Future theme.  These span all four Girlguiding sections (age groups) and have been created to be  completed offline to ensure they are accessible to all girls. • In June at APAC, we launched113 the Japan Reskilling Consortium, a  collaboration  between business, governments, and the nonprofit sector that provides skills  training in areas such as artificial intelligence and digital marketing. It also provides  a job-matching service to help trainees find work opportunities. The consortium  already offers more than 300 training programs with more than 90 partners. • In the U.S., we announced114 that we will be joining Ford Motor Company as a  founding member of Michigan Central .115 Michigan Central is a new innovation  hub where companies, government, and community stakeholders will focus on the  future of mobility — both in terms of economic opportunity and transportation  solutions — in Detroit and beyond. Specifically, we’re offering our Cloud  infrastructure, AI and ML capabilities, and data and analytics tools to Michigan  Central to be used on projects and research for future mobility solutions. Google Research provided the technology, including a new skin tone classifier based on the MST Monk Skin Tone Scale, to a new  study examining representation across gender, skin tone and age in scripted TV over the last 12 years,
2022 AI Principles Progress Update36Alongside policymakers and standards organizations, we recognize AI carries risks as well  as opening up exciting possibilities. We are optimistic about the potential for standards  to continue to move the industry forward in a responsible way. So we remain actively  engaged in key conversations with international forums such as the Organisation for  Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD), the International Standardization  Organization ( ISO), and national standards bodies such as NIST in the U.S. For example, in collaboration with the private and public sectors — including dialogue  with the EU, ISO, and others — NIST is developing a voluntary-use framework to help  organizations better manage risks associated with AI. We filed a Google response to  NIST's request for feedback116 on an initial framework draft. We expressed our support  for the initiative and shared recommendations, including to clarify the roles of different  stakeholders in the AI value chain, expand on the distinction between fairness and unfair  bias, and determine how the NIST framework can be integrated with other standards and  frameworks. Through these relationships, we work to help coordinate efforts to drive the development  of consensus, multi-stakeholder standards for AI and emerging tech systems, and  common benchmarks for AI evaluation. We will continue to contribute to the public  consultation on emerging legislation like the EU’s AI Act,  and share resources with  policy leaders with our Machine Learning for Policy Leaders workshop , which has  trained 600 stakeholders around the world since its launch in 2020. We continue to  partner with other external organizations, including the Future of Humanity Institute,  University of Oxford, and The Centre for Internet and Society, among many other  engagements.
37 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateConclusion AI will always reflect human values. For AI to live up to its full potential, the complex  intersection of those values with this new technology will require multidisciplinary  thinking across computational and social sciences — including foundational research,  multimodal content understanding, a responsible AI lens, and more. It is essential that  this truly collective approach involves many international and interdisciplinary contexts.  That is why we are committed to a collaborative, cross-disciplinary approach to building  helpful AI for everyone. This year, to continue to build on this strategy, we supported the Economist Impact ’s  efforts to publish whitepapers on the economic impact of AI and how governments  can encourage AI adoption in the Middle East and North Africa117 and Latin America.118  We shared insights from these papers at respective events co-hosted with the UAE AI  Ministry and the Council of the Americas, and continue to engage with key policymakers  and stakeholders in these regions. Internally, we continue to engage external advisors with our socio-technical AI research  that informs AI research and product design. For example, to identify potential fairness  considerations, the Photos and Assistant product teams, and researchers working on  generative AI including Imagen, Parti, and the AI Test Kitchen, have participated in  the Equitable AI Research Roundtable  (EARR).119 This program offers the opportunity  to identify potential fairness considerations with a group of experts from the Othering  and Belonging Institute at UC Berkeley; PolicyLink; Ed Trust West; University of Texas,  Austin; and Emory University School of Law early in the product development lifecycle. We still have a lot to learn — and will continue learning — given the dynamic and evolving  nature of technology and society. The act of innovation is rooted not only in coming up  with Big Ideas but also in constant iteration, including within our own AI governance and  operations, processes, and tools. Google’s AI Principles governance strategy is to constantly iterate and improve – which also reflects the company’s overall  responsible innovation strategy
2022 AI Principles Progress Update38Innovation also means reaching out to users and partners across the technology  industry, geographies, academic disciplines, cultures, and governments, listening to  and analyzing their needs over time. This helps us design and test, learn from missteps,  adjust, and improve. Listening helps us proactively design new AI solutions as new  challenges emerge — and respond to feedback, and the inevitable criticisms, with  respect and a commitment and willingness to change. Because AI helps us address the world’s most pressing large-scale problems and helps  to shape the world’s future, it‘s more important than ever that we get this right, together.
39 2022 AI Principles Progress UpdateEnd Notes 1. https://blog.google/technology/ai/join-us-in-the-ai-test-kitchen/ 2. https://blog.google/products/translate/24-new-languages/ 3. https://blog.google/technology/health/advancing-genomics-better-understand-and-treatdisease/ 4. https://blog.google/technology/health/check-up-ai-developments-2022/ 5. https://www.wired.com/story/hurricane-ian-destroyed-homes-google-algorithms-sent-money/ 6. https://www.iso.org/committee/6794475.html 7. https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework 8. https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/Help-and-Resources/2020/01/Model-AI-Governance-Framework 9. https://www.mas.gov.sg/schemes-and-initiatives/veritas 10. https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2022-11/Ai_for_All_2022_02112022_0.pdf 11. https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/pl/charter-charte/c27_1.html#:~:text=In%20 addition%2C%20the%20Artificial%20Intelligence,with%20other%20government%20 entities%20specified 12. https://www.camara.leg.br/proposicoesWeb/prop_ mostrarintegra?codteor=1853928&filename=PL-21-2020 13. https://www.msit.go.kr/bbs/view.do?sCode=eng&mId=10&mPid=9&bbsSeqNo=46&nttSeqNo=9 14. https://www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/news-updates/2021/10/22/icymi-wired-opinion-americansneed-a-bill-of-rights-for-an-ai-powered-world/ 15. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/data-ethics-and-ai-guidance-landscape 16. https://www.gov.il/en/departments/news/most-news20221117 17. https://www.ft.com/content/3467659a-386d-11ea-ac3c-f68c10993b04 18. https://blog.google/technology/ai/crossword-puzzle-big-purpose/ 19. https://blog.google/technology/ai/an-update-on-our-work-in-responsibleinnovation/#:~:text=moral%20imagination%20workshop 20. https://blog.google/inside-google/googlers/meet-3-women-who-test-google-productsfairness/ 21. https://parti.research.google/ 22. https://imagen.research.google/
2022 AI Principles Progress Update4023. https://translate.google.com/ 24. https://storage.googleapis.com/gresearch/translate-gender-challenge-sets/Readme.html 25. https://ai.google/principles/ 26. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Biographies_of_living_persons 27. https://storage.googleapis.com/gresearch/translate-gender-challenge-sets/Readme.html 28. https://ai.googleblog.com/2021/06/a-dataset-for-studying-gender-bias-in.html 29. https://storage.googleapis.com/gresearch/translate-gender-challenge-sets/Data%20Card.pdf 30. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a/buolamwini18a.pdf 31. http://gendershades.org/ 32. https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2021W/RCV/papers/Hazirbas_Casual_ Conversations_A_Dataset_for_Measuring_Fairness_in_AI_CVPRW_2021_paper.pdf 33. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK481857/table/chapter6.t1/ 34. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9590512 35. https://direct.mit.edu/daed/article/150/2/76/98313/The-Unceasing-Significance-of-ColorismSkin-Tone 36. https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/682162 37. https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/monk/files/monk_-_the_consequences_of_race_and_color_in_ brazil_-_sp.pdf 38. https://www.norc.org/Pages/default.aspx 39. https://skintone.google/get-started 40. https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/fairness/video-lecture 41. https://google.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_eFJF7qguvcWvdFs 42. https://blog.google/technology/ai/join-us-in-the-ai-test-kitchen/l 43. https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/01/lamda-towards-safe-grounded-and-high.html 44. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08239 45. https://dynamicworld.app/explore/ 46. https://io.google/2022/program/385b422e-3a08-4372-8ed3-4e79bafb779a/ 47. https://www.bsr.org/en/ 48. https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07858
41 2022 AI Principles Progress Update49. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.05256.pdf 50. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.01034.pdf 51. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3491102.3517716 52. https://ai-cultures.github.io/ 53. https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3491101.3503564 54. https://www.deepmind.com/publications/red-teaming-language-models-with-language-models 55. https://www.tensorflow.org/responsible_ai/model_remediation 56. https://pair-code.github.io/lit/ 57. https://knowyourdata.withgoogle.com/ 58. https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311 59. https://sites.research.google/scouts/ 60. https://jigsaw.google.com/ 61. https://perspectiveapi.com/ 62. https://medium.com/jigsaw/scaling-machine-learning-fairness-with-societal-contextbe73d4ad38e2 63. https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.13028 64. https://github.com/google-research/parti/blob/main/data_cards/fit400m_data_card.pdf 65. https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02311 66. https://pair-code.github.io/datacardsplaybook/ 67. https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903 68. https://aclanthology.org/D19-1221.pdf 69. https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.05638 70. https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.06367 71. https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.72.pdf 72. https://blog.google/technology/ai/an-update-on-our-work-in-responsibleinnovation/#:~:text=an%20internal%20tool%20to%20help%20teams%20assess%20how%20 ml%20models%20were%20developed 73. https://blog.youtube/inside-youtube/inside-responsibility-whats-next-on-our-misinfo-efforts/ 74. https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/accessibility/look-to-speak-launches-in-ukraine/
2022 AI Principles Progress Update4275. https://globalgoals.withgoogle.com/ 76. https://medium.com/people-ai-research/q-a-courtney-heldreth-and-michal-lahav-onaddressing-inequitable-speech-recognition-it-takes-a-a2d65b1b7744 77. https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/accessibility/project-relate/ 78. https://sites.research.google/euphonia/about/ 79. https://blog.google/technology/ai/ways-ai-is-scaling-helpful/ 80. https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/05/24-new-languages-google-translate.html 81. https://blog.google/products/chrome/building-a-more-helpful-browser-with-machine-learning/ 82. https://pair.withgoogle.com/guidebook/ 83. https://blog.google/technology/ai/helping-people-understand-ai/ 84. https://blog.google/products/pixel/feature-drop-december-2022/ 85. https://blog.google/products/chrome/building-a-more-helpful-browser-with-machine-learning/ 86. https://blog.google/products/maps/how-ai-and-imagery-build-self-updating-map/ 87. https://blog.google/technology/safety-security/how-we-make-every-day-safer-with-google/ 88. https://www.nature.com/nature-index/institution-outputs/articles/all/global/United%20 States%20of%20America%20%28USA%29/Alphabet%20Inc./corporate 89. https://research.google/pubs/?collection=responsible-ai 90. https://cloud.devsite.corp.google.com/vertex-ai-vision 91. https://www.google.com/search/howsearchworks/ 92. https://www.youtube.com/howyoutubeworks/ 93. http://g.co/DiscoverAI 94. https://applieddigitalskills.withgoogle.com/s/en/home?utm_source=keyword&utm_ medium=blog&utm_campaign=20220211-AI-Blog-2022--all-all-&src=keyword-blog-20220211AI-Blog-2022--all-all95. https://grow.google/ 96. https://blog.google/technology/ai/helping-people-understand-ai/ 97. https://www.cloudskillsboost.google/course_templates/388 98. https://google-research.github.io/proteinfer/ 99. https://aimsammi.org/blog-post/aims-launches-african-masters-in-machine-intelligence-in-
43 2022 AI Principles Progress Updatekigali-rwanda/ 100. https://research.google/outreach/phd-fellowship/ 101. https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/education/a-look-at-the-responsible-innovationfellowship/ 102. https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/education/expand-cs-ed-access/ 103. http://g.co/csrmp 104. https://blog.google/technology/research/mentorship-inspires-deyrel-diaz-and-futureresearchers/ 105. https://store.hbr.org/product/responsible-a-i-tackling-tech-s-largest-corporate-governancechallenges/b6021?sku=B6021-PDF-ENG 106. https://insait.ai/ 107. https://blog.google/technology/ai/investing-in-eastern-europes-ai-future/ 108. https://sites.research.google/trc/about/ 109. https://seejane.org/research-informs-empowers/see-it-be-it-what-families-are-watching-ontv/ 110. https://seejane.org/ 111. http://sail.usc.edu/ 112. https://blog.google/around-the-globe/google-europe/united-kingdom/girlguiding-and-googletechnology-is-for-everyone/ 113. https://www.blog.google/around-the-globe/google-asia/digital-skills-japan/ 114. https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/grow-with-google/michigan-central-ford/ 115. https://michigancentral.com/ 116. https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework 117. https://impact.economist.com/perspectives/technology-innovation/pushing-forward-future-aimiddle-east-and-north-africa 118. https://impact.economist.com/perspectives/technology-innovation/seizing-opportunity-futureai-latin-america 119. https://blog.google/technology/ai/update-our-progress-responsible-aiinnovation/#:~:text=equitable%20ai%20research%20roundtables%20(earr)%2C
2022 AI Principles Progress Update44This page is intentionally left blank.
45 2022 AI Principles Progress Update
