BUILDING ETHICS INTO  PRIVACY FRAMEWORKS  FOR BIG DATA AND AI 
2 Executive Summary Big data, new technologies, and new analytical approaches, if  applied responsibly, have tremendous potential to be used for the  public good. Big data’s greatest value for global development lies in  harnessing the power of real-time and predictive analytics for smarter  decision making, anticipatory approaches to managing risk, and new  ways to measure social impact. At the same time, big data amplifies risks to privacy, fairness,  equality, and due process. Large-scale data collection can expose  characteristics and behaviors of individuals, lead to biased decisionmaking based on unrepresentative or inaccurate data samples, and  lack transparency, preventing individuals from exercising due process  rights. Organizations have to weigh the benefits of processing data  against associated risks, but they often lack a recognized systematic  framework to deploy. Also, understanding the complexities of big data  analytics requires the engagement of professionals who are versed  in an interdisciplinary body of knowledge covering law, technology,  ethics, engineering, risk management, and design. The United Nations Global Pulse and the International Association of  Privacy Professionals explored these issues and discussed their many  aspects at a jointly hosted event: “Building a Strong Data Privacy and  Ethics Program: From Theory to Practice,” held in May 2017 in New York  (hereafter referred to as the “UN GP/IAPP event”). The event brought together humanitarian and development  organizations, including the World Food Programme (WFP), the United  Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations High  Commissioner of Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Children’s Fund  (UNICEF), and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC);  NGOs; representatives of private sector corporations such as MasterCard,  TrustArc, Nielsen, and IBM; as well as privacy regulators from across the  world. The presence of stakeholders from different sectors presented an opportunity to view big data analytics not only from the perspective  of routine uses of big data for marketing and other business-related  purposes, but also in the context of humanitarian and development  causes, such as using data to track the emergence and progress of  pandemics, to prioritize resource allocation for sustainable development,  or to target disaster relief to the most vulnerable populations. This report provides an overview of how organizations can  operationalize data ethics, drawing on the discussions at the UN GP/ IAPP event as well as on additional research about data ethics and  privacy best practices in a world of big data analytics. It demonstrates how organizations deploying data analytics and  artificial intelligence (aka AI) can reflect ethics considerations in  their decision making, borrowing tried and true operational tactics  from the field of information privacy. Such steps may include, for  example: building a multi-disciplinary team across departments to  practice ethics “on the ground”; conducting ethics assessments for  new big data projects to consider their personal and societal impacts,  while consulting with external and internal ethics working groups;  and building programs that are scalable and flexible, which depend  on factors such as the societal context of a big data project and the  organizational structure of the entity performing it. Big Data Insights for the Public Good  “The member states of the United Nations set ambitious sustainable  development goals [aka SDGs] that do not allow trade-offs between  prosperity, the health of the planet, and social progress. We need data  to reach these goals and to transform society. However, this data is  largely produced by people, often without their knowledge, collected  by machines, and owned by the private sector,” noted Director of UN  Global Pulse Robert Kirkpatrick during his opening remarks at the UN  GP/IAPP event.
3 Similarly, United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Privacy  Joe Cannataci, in his most recent report to the UN General Assembly,  while noting the risks that come with the use of large data sets,  recognizes that “there is broad agreement that big data can produce  social benefits including personalized services, increased access to  services, better health outcomes, technological advancements and  accessibility improvements.” There is, he said, a “need to make sense  of ‘big data,’ leading to innovations in technology, development of  new tools and new skills.”1 Numerous pilot and research projects have already shown the  feasibility of using data from various sources like mobile phones,  social media, financial transactions, or satellite imagery to support  the SDGs. For example, following a typhoid outbreak, UN Global  Pulse’s data science lab in Kampala produced a series of weekly  data visualization reports2 from health centers across Uganda, with  interactive maps at district, sub-county, and individual health facility  level. The visualizations revealed clusters of the infectious disease,  aiding in the allocation of medicine, medical personnel, and health  centers.  Private sector companies have similarly started to experiment  with using big data for public good. In 2017, the mobile industry  association, GSMA, launched a Big Data for Social Good Initiative  that currently comprises 19 mobile operators including Vodafone,  Telefonica, Telenor, KT, Airtel, and Orange3. Twitter has partnered  with the UN, through Global Pulse, and is providing access to its data  and tools to support sustainable development and humanitarian  1 Joseph Cannataci (Special Rapporteur on the right to privacy), Report of the Special  Rapporteur on the right to privacy, U.N. Doc. A/72/43103 (Oct. 19, 2017). 2 Data Visualization and Interactive Mapping to Support Response to Disease Outbreak,  https://www.unglobalpulse.org/projects/mapping-infectious-diseases. 3 See additional examples in Omer Tene & Jules Polonetsky, Big Data for All: Privacy and  User Control in the Age of Analytics, 11 Nw J. Tech & IP 239 (2013).action.4 A number of other private sector entities, including financial  service providers and retailers, have partnered with the UN to use  their data for social impact.  Many participants at the UN GP/IAPP event also noted that society  as a whole needs to better realize the potential of big data for  public good. Terrell McSweeny, former Commissioner for the U.S.  Federal Trade Commission, noted there is “incredible potential for  big data analytics to provide benefits to people,” such as through  increasing educational attainment, supporting access to credit,  providing health care solutions tailored specifically to individuals’  needs and characteristics, and even helping to build a more diverse  workforce. Knowledge gained from large-scale data analytics can  greatly add to the public knowledge base to also benefit scholars  and researchers. These applications of big data, coupled with AI and machine learning,  can bring widespread benefits. As noted by the UN SecretaryGeneral, “Artificial intelligence can help analyze enormous volumes  of data, which in turn can improve predictions, prevent crimes and  help governments better serve people. But there are also serious  challenges – and ethical issues at stake. There are real concerns about  cybersecurity, human rights and privacy – not to mention the obvious  and significant impact on the labor market.”5 Applications of AI can help people with disabilities better navigate  everyday challenges, provide workforce support where needed, or  reduce traffic and workplace accidents. They can help physicians  better diagnose patients or improve delivery of care by reducing  4 https://www.unglobalpulse.org/news/twitter-and-un-global-pulse-announce-data-  partnership. 5 The UN Secretary General’s video message to the Artificial Intelligence for the Global Good  Summit, https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2017-06-07/secretary-generalsvideo-message-artificial-intelligence-global-good.
4 waiting times. However, they can also be used as weapons to target  sensitive population groups and to cause individual harm.  To mitigate some of the risks, the privacy and ethical challenges  associated with big data use should be addressed during the data  collection and project development phase, as opposed to reactively,  after the fact. At the same time, as noted by Teki Akkueteh, former  Data Protection Commissioner of Ghana at the UN GP/IAPP event,  any risks to individual privacy should be weighed against the benefits  of using technology to save lives and improve livelihoods. According  to her, “in Africa [for example] people need basic economic rights  guaranteed to them. Therefore, it is important for data protection to  work in such a way as to assure the achievement of the sustainable  development goals.”  This is in concert with the findings of the GSMA’s “The State of  Mobile Data for Social Good Report,“ which found, “[W]hile there  are certain risks and costs associated with using mobile data to  produce social good insights, there may also be risks and harms  associated with a failure to include this and other new data sources  to inform policy, humanitarian response and other development  interventions.”6 Ethics, AI and Big Data While privacy protection has been a longstanding tool in ensuring  responsible and accountable use of personal data, participants at the  UN GP/IAPP event noted that in a world of AI and big data analytics,  principles for responsible use of data must extend beyond privacy  norms. 6 The State of Mobile Data for Social Good Report (June 2017), https://www.gsma.com/ mobilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Mobile-Data-for-Social-GoodReport_29June.pdf.In today’s world, a comprehensive solution for realizing big data and  AI benefits for the greater good requires a combination of technical,  governance, legal, and ethical responses. This calls for a multidisciplinary approach that draws on the expertise of major players  in these distinct, yet complementary fields. Recently, both private and public sector organizations have started  to consider ethics as an additional element for mitigating risks  associated with the use of big data. In 2017, the United Nations  Development Group, a forum comprising more than 35 UN agencies,  came together to craft an approach to big data that is based not only  on privacy, but also on ethical and moral obligations concerning data  use in development and humanitarian contexts, which it published in  its UNDG Guidance Note on “Data Privacy, Data Protection and Ethics:  Big Data for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda.”7 UNICEF builds ethical considerations8 into its data collection policies  by adhering to mechanisms for review, such as internal and external  review boards that work to identify anticipated or actual ethical issues  that could arise during data collection, and by offering basic ethics  training for researchers. Data ethics can be defined as the branch of ethics that studies  and evaluates moral problems related to data use, as explained by  the participants of the Data Ethics session at the ITU AI for Good  Summit in Geneva in June 2017. “Data ethics must address the whole  conceptual space ,9” including a “diverse set of ethical implications of  data science within a consistent, holistic and inclusive framework.” 7 https://undg.org/document/data-privacy-ethics-and-protection-guidance-note-on- bigdata-for-achievement-of-the-2030-agenda/. 8 Children and the Data Cycle: Rights and Ethics in a Big Data World, https://www. unicef-irc. org/publications/907-children-and-the-data-cyclerights-and-ethics-in-a- big-data-world.html. 9 Luciano Floridi and Mariarosaria Taddeo, What is data ethics?, http://rsta.  royalsocietypublishing.org/content/roypta/374/2083/20160360.full.pdf.
5 Data ethics are necessary but insufficient: Incorporation of privacy by  design is likewise essential, as applications that employ big data and  AI operate with less human supervision. The latter raises new risks for  mission critical technologies. A data ethics program could, however,  be a core component of privacy by design. In this vein, Ann Cavoukian,  who coined the term “privacy by design,” has now also proposed seven  principles of “AI Ethics by Design ”10 in addition to her privacy by design  principles..11 Renowned ethicist and Oxford University professor Luciano Floridi  defines12 the field of data ethics as “the branch of ethics that  studies and evaluates moral problems related to data, algorithms  and corresponding practices … , in order to formulate and support  morally good solutions (e.g. right conducts or right values).” Big  data and AI require consideration of human rights concepts beyond  individual privacy, extending assessment to ethical implications of  data use not only on individuals but also on groups of people. In  areas like humanitarian response, where fundamental principles of  privacy like accuracy are inherently challenged and consent is not  a panacea given that benefits are associated with risks, ethical and  moral obligations must come into play in addition to well established  privacy principles. The Perils of Inaction One of the ethical concerns associated with big data is the price of  failing to use it for the public good in cases when the possibility to do so  responsibly exists. 10 See, “AI Ethics by Design,” https://www.ryerson.ca/pbdce/papers/. 11 Ann Cavoukian, Privacy by Design, The 7 Foundational Principles, https://www.ipc. on.ca/ wp-content/uploads/Resources/7foundationalprinciples.pdf. 12 See, Luciano Floridi and Mariarosaria Taddeo, “Introduction: What is data ethics?,” http:// rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/374/2083.Learning from medical ethics: A case study Following a series of highly publicized abuses of human subjects in  research experiments in the United States, including the infamous  Tuskegee Experiment and the Stanford Prison Experiment, the  medical field recognized the need to incorporate ethics into data use  frameworks. The disclosures prompted a study called the Belmont  Report, which resulted in what is known as “the Common Rule,” codified  in U.S. federal regulations that apply to 15 government agencies. The Common Rule incorporates three central ethical principles, which  underlie ethical frameworks in many countries around the world. The  first, respect for persons, pertains to individual dignity and autonomy  and is applied through the concept of informed consent. The second  principle, beneficence, requires weighing the risks to people associated  with a research activity against the benefits to people and society.  The third principle, justice, considers who gets chosen to be a research  subject and what population segments stand to benefit — or be harmed  — by the research results. By adopting these ethical pillars, the medical field in the U.S. addressed  a major problem afflicting human subject research at the time, namely  that engagement with research subjects had shifted away from  regarding them as humans capable of suffering harm to viewing them  as mere objects or data points. Because data analytics today may avoid any personal interaction with  the data subjects themselves, many big data research projects present  similar risks. And because data analytics is now deployed ubiquitously  across industries — not just in health care — opportunities for abuse  have multiplied exponentially.
6 Within the UN system, Global Pulse has been working to harness the  power of big data and AI to accelerate progress towards the SDGs in  a way that is privacy protective, inclusive and fair. Other international  organizations, such as the World Health Organization, World Food  Programme, International Organization of Migration, The UN High  Commissioner for Refugees, the Food and Agriculture Organization,  International Telecommunication Union, UN Development Programme,  International Committee of the Red Cross, UNICEF,  and UNESCO, to  name only a few, are likewise already doing innovative work with big  data and AI to support the achievement of the SDGs in ways that  prioritize protection of privacy. The ICRC “Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian Action ”13  describes how humanitarian relief efforts such as “mapping or  identifying” patterns of events in emergencies or situations of violence  can be greatly enhanced when data analytics are used to recognize  general crisis patterns or identify individuals and communities in  need. The UN Global Pulse Advisory Group , in its report “Big Data for  Development: Towards Responsible Governance ,” suggests that big data  analytics raises concerns about risks of harms, fueled by the lack of  proper guidance, especially to address the risks in development and  humanitarian contexts and balance them with data rewards. This often  prevents effective harnessing of data when it is most critical14. Privacy is a fundamental human right, and data use must be privacy  protective. However, any right, including the right to privacy, should  be assessed in light of all human rights, such as the right to life, food,  shelter, health, and education. As noted by the UN Special Rapporteur  13 International Committee of the Red Cross, Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian  Action (Christopher Kuner and Massimo Marelli, eds., 2017), https://brusselsprivacyhub.eu/ publications/dataprotectionhandbook.html. 14 UN Global Pulse, ”Big Data for Development: Towards Responsible Governance,”, available  at https://www.unglobalpulse.org/news/big-data-development-and-humanitarian- actiontowards-responsible-governance-report.on the right to privacy, “All of [the human] rights are important and  commitment to one right should not detract from the importance  and protection of another right. Taking rights in conjunction wherever  possible is healthier than taking rights in opposition to each other.”15 Robert Kirkpatrick summed it up at the 2018 ITU AI for Good Global  Summit: “As global efforts to develop new frameworks around the  responsible use of emerging technologies begin to take shape, it is  imperative that they address not only the human rights implications of  ‘misuse,’ but also those of the ‘missed use.’” In considering the risks of  data use, therefore, professionals must take into account not only the  potential risks and harms that could result from improper action, but also  those that could arise from inaction.16 “Misinformed” Decision-Making and Other  Consequences of Unethical Use While bearing great potential for public good, data analytics may also  lead to poor decision making, and unethical data practices can produce  harmful results. Algorithms that fail to correct bias or discrimination, or  data sets built on inaccurate information, could lead to flawed results  that may deprive people of crucial opportunities or services17 — for  example, excluding minority demographics from ads for housing or  employment. Big data can present ethical issues and social dilemmas  arising from poorly considered use of technology. The unintended  consequences of big data are a constant risk that should be  accounted for in the design process of projects and programs. 15 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to privacy, Joseph A. Cannataci. 8 March. A/ HRC/31/64, pp. 6, 10. Annex II. A more in-depth look at Open Data & Big Data. 16 See Omer Tene & Gabe Maldoff, The Cost of Not Using Data: Balancing Privacy and the  Perils of Inaction, Journal of Law, Economics & Policy (forthcoming 2018). 17 UN OCHA, Building data responsibility into humanitarian action, https://www. unocha.org/ publication/policy-briefs-studies/building-data-responsibility-humanitarian-action.
7 As the ICRC Handbook explains, the use of data analytics can lead  to misleading and inaccurate results, and can justify “arbitrary and  automated decisions that do not take case-specific particularities  into consideration.” Sometimes big data projects facilitate effective  surveillance through digital footprints or violate privacy through reidentification of individuals who may have participated in a dataset on  the promise of anonymity. There may be a need for a codified set of data ethics because datasets  can no longer be considered static archives; rather they can be reused  to generate new insights and consequences for individuals. For example,  as described in the Risks Harms and Benefits Assessment Tool18 of  UN Global Pulse, a new data set created by an algorithm may by itself  become a risk.  While the risks may create unaccounted harms for humans, many  concerns over legal impediments and ethical restrictions also  diminish productive collaboration between researchers, public sector  organizations, and private sector businesses for the greater social  good. This, in turn, risks depriving society of an opportunity to live  better and safer — another unaccounted harm on its own. Using Old Data Through New Means When researchers interact with data gathered for other purposes,  ethical issues might arise. These ethical issues should be weighed in  light of the value of these data uses to society as a whole. Speaking at the UN GP/IAPP event, Daniel Goroff, VP and program  director at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, emphasized the need to have  clearly defined research goals with demonstrated potential to advance  18 https://www.unglobalpulse.org/privacy/toolsthe public good in order to justify privacy sacrifices.”19 However, some  participants at the event also noted that, in some cases, researchers  may have to begin the process with feasibility studies based on  aggregate statistics, for example, to determine whether more detailed  research could potentially lead to scientifically significant outcomes.  Attendees nevertheless agreed that incentives to give up privacy rights  in exchange for research that may eradicate a serious disease or lead to  more efficient humanitarian assistance are much stronger than those  supporting research to improve product placement. No doubt, data research that requires privacy compromises must be  justified by a benefit to the data subject or society at large. Ethics  in big data require engaging in a risk analysis weighing the potential  value to society versus individual rights and interests. Codified by  the UNDG Guidance Note on Big Data Privacy, Ethics and Data  Protection, such risk analysis should embody a utilitarian ethic  where “any potential risks and harms should not be excessive in  relation to the [likely] positive impacts of data use.”20 Programming Behaviors When decisions are automated, they might raise ethical  considerations, in particular with respect to the decision-making  methodology. A common example involves the application of the  age-old “trolley problem” for self-driving cars, which will inevitably  encounter hard choices affecting human lives. Depending on what  19 Also see Daniel Goroff, Jules Polonetsky & Omer Tene, Privacy Protective Research:  Facilitating Ethically Responsible Access to Administrative Data, Annals of the American  Academy of Political and Social Science 675 (January 2018). 20 UNDG Guidance Note on Big Data for Achievement of the 2030 Agenda: Data Privacy,  Ethics and Protection. https://undg.org/document/data-privacy-ethics-and-protectionguidance-note-on-big-data-for-achievement-of-the-2030-agenda/ ; also see Jules  Polonetsky, Omer Tene & Joseph Jerome, Benefit-Risk Analysis for Big Data Projects,  Future of Privacy Forum White Paper, September 2014, https://fpf.org/wp-content/ uploads/FPF_DataBenefitAnalysis_FINAL.pdf.
8 machines are designed to do, moreover, questions arise21 regarding  displacement of the human workforce; the deployment of machines  in certain arenas, such as armed conflict; and the level of intelligence  society is willing to accept in machines. In light of the myriad ethical issues raised by data analytics and AI,  professionals working with organizations using big data should have  a basic understanding of data ethics and tools for incorporating  it into decision making. Big data draws on the fields of physics,  computer science, and applied mathematics, disciplines that “have  not been required to practically grapple with ethics requirements,  [and therefore] they often lack access to pedagogical resources about  research ethics that are widespread in other fields. ”22 Hence, there is a  growing need to make data ethics a requirement in the education of  not just students of the humanities but also technologists and those  who use data to make decisions.23 Tools for Thinking about Data Ethics —   and Privacy Data ethics involves organizations investing resources to build  internal programs to weigh and balance benefits and risks to  individuals from big data and AI uses. According to Emory University  ethicist Paul Root Wolpe, data ethics addresses considerations  of bias (often inherent in the choices made when selecting data  subjects, building a data set, and deciding on research methods); data  21 Burton, et al., Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence Courses, https:// arxiv.org/ pdf/1701.07769.pdf?imm_mid=0ed017&cmp=em-data-na-na-newsltr_ ai_20170206. 22 Jacob Metcalf, Emily F Keller, and Dannah Boyd, Perspectives on Big Data, Ethics, and  Society, The Council For Big Data, Ethics, And Society (2016), http://bdes.datasociety.net/ wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Perspectives-on-Big-Data.pdf. 23 Dennis Hirsch & Keir Lamont, The Age of the Cyber Pro, IAPP White Paper, 2018, available  at https://iapp.org/media/pdf/resource_center/Age-of-the-Cyberpro.pdf.ownership and the rights to control data use; and power imbalances  between an organization collecting data and individual data subjects.  It is true that, at minimum, awareness of unintended consequences  can mitigate potential sources of bias. One of the tools recommended  by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers to reduce bias  is for “designers [to] take on an interdisciplinary approach and involve  relevant experts or advisory group(s) into the design process … when  designing for dynamically vulnerable populations.”24 Data ethics also incorporates privacy. This encompasses the protections  an organization puts in place around how the data is collected, used,  and shared. For example, data analytics in the context of a humanitarian  effort may create a conflict between personal privacy interests on the  one hand — reflected in the purpose limitation and data minimization  principles — and the interests of the broader community or society on  the other hand, served by observing patterns and predicting outcomes. When data is gathered from individuals in response to a particular  incident, it may later become useful in analysis to evaluate trends  for purposes of, say, providing adequate emergency response and  disaster relief, or matching lost persons with their families. Data  protection principles caution against any further processing  that might lead to identifying an individual or leaking sensitive  data about him or her, as such disclosures could lead to harmful  personal consequences. Yet, data analysis could at the same time  empower humanitarian efforts to reduce or eliminate future harm  to numerous individuals by allowing for conflict intervention or  rushing food aid to those on the  brink  of famine. Reconciling the  clash between these competing public goods — individual privacy  protection vs. societal benefit — is at the heart of data ethics. 24 The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and  Autonomous Systems. Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision For Prioritizing Wellbeing With  Artificial Intelligence And Autonomous Systems, Version 1. IEEE, 2016. http:// standards. ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html.
9 In 2016, UN Global Pulse developed a Risk Assessment Tool — a  compliance mechanism that includes elements of both privacy  and data ethics for understanding and managing risks, harms and  benefits associated with big data in development and humanitarian  contexts. The guidelines to using the tool encourage organizations  to include, where reasonably practical, a representative of the  individuals or groups who are potentially affected by data use in the  deliberations. Mila Romanoff, Privacy Specialist at UN Global Pulse,  explained that involvement of representatives of affected populations  or consideration of their specific context, culture, social layer etc.,  provides a better ground for an ethical decision in situations that are  not clear cut. Privacy professionals have been deployed on the ground25 across  jurisdictions and industries to implement privacy programs and raise  awareness throughout the data and technology space. As Deirdre  Mulligan of UC Berkeley School of Information explained at the UN  GP/IAPP event, this has for example involved engaging management  of private businesses to see privacy as a strategic issue, thus  incorporating privacy into daily decision-making processes, and  more profoundly, into a company’s DNA. At the UN GP/IAPP event, participants discussed how privacy  professionals incorporate ethics into their data governance programs.  Fortunately, while answers do not come easily, building a process to  generate the right questions about data ethics — and to put them  in front of the right professionals — shares many features with  traditional privacy programs. As Bonnie Green from the World Food  Programme put it, ethics and privacy should be “mainstreamed”  together: “We have risk assessments and humanitarian principles.  We should continue to use them as ways to assess and incorporate  privacy and ethics, together.” Considerations of ethics are also  25 Kenneth Bamberger and Deirdre Mulligan, Privacy on the Books and on the Ground,  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1568385.included in the WFP Guide to Personal Data Protection and  Privacy .26 Model Data Ethics Structures Various existing frameworks can supplement organizations’ decisionmaking processes to address the newly emerging field of data ethics.  These frameworks offer different perspectives and governance  options to organizations with weighty data ethics questions or largescale processing of sensitive data. Internal Frameworks Organizations can choose from a variety of tools to implement data  ethics considerations. Many tools are derived from more traditional  frameworks for privacy impact assessments (often called PIAs, or  DPIAs, for data protection impact assessments, in Europe especially).  The Information Accountability Foundation’s Comprehensive Data  Impact Assessments (or CDIAs)27 address uses of big data not  clearly authorized by either consent or legislation. The various CDIA  forms can be tailored to specific countries and serve as a framework  to address gray areas of data use that may not be illegal but are  unethical. Some organization also task their internal privacy working group  with data ethics considerations. Several organizations have  established interdepartmental privacy working groups to consider  how to properly and effectively handle privacy challenges with big  data. Rather than establishing a separate working group for data  ethics, it may be efficient to add data ethics to the remit of those  groups in order to take advantage of their structure and expertise. 26 https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/e8d24e70cc11448383495caca154cb97/ download/ 27 IAF, Comprehensive Data Impact Assessment Master Project, http://  informationaccountability.org/comprehensive-data-impact-assessment-master- project.
10 Internal frameworks can be helpful in promoting “inward facing  goals.” Professor Jacob Metcalf, who runs a National Science  Foundation-funded multisite project, Pervasive Data Ethics for  Computational Research, defines an “inward facing goal” as an ethical  framework that “provides guidance when an existing inexplicit norm or  value is insufficient.” After completing a cross discipline of numerous  ethical codes, Metcalf noted that codified internal frameworks  are “beneficial for creating generalized rules for individuals and  organizations that have responsibilities for important human goods.”  Further, internal frameworks can establish role-specific guidelines and  standards of behavior for academics, research students, and clients.28 Another approach could be modeled on the idea of an internal ethics  board, similar to an academic internal review board (often called  an “IRB”). A multidisciplinary board weighs the potential benefits  of a project against any attendant risks. This system is an example  of a practical approach at the intersection of privacy and data  ethics. Here flexibility is valued “to accommodate the fast moving  nature of research projects, and the importance of steering away  from the attempted application of one strict set of standards to all  departments and teams.”  Researchers “conduct analysis of a wide array of data sources, from  massive commercial or government databases to individual ... postings  publicly available online, with little or no opportunity to directly  engage human subjects to obtain their consent or even inform them  of research activities.”29 In such situations, where obtaining data  subject consent is not feasible or practical, an internal IRB can be one  of the risk mitigation tools. 28 Jacob Metcalf, Ethics Codes: History, Context, and Challenges, The Council for Big Data,  Ethics, and Society, (2014) http://bdes.datasociety.net/wp-content/ uploads/2016/10/ EthicsCodes.pdf. 29 Omer Tene and Jules Polonetsky, Beyond IRBs: Ethical Guidelines for Data Research, 72  Wash. & Lee L. Rev. Online 458 (2016).IRB-like mechanisms could significantly improve the inclusion of  ethical, moral and human rights concerns in decisions about data  analysis. This may be complemented by a need to consult the affected  individuals or groups for a more informed decision.  UN Global Pulse’s Risks, Harms, Benefits Assessment30 suggests the  use of “a diverse team comprised of the project leader as well as  other subject matter experts, including — where reasonably practical  — a representative of the individuals or groups of individuals  who could be potentially affected.” The aforementioned ITU AI for  Good Summit produced recommendations to include historically  underrepresented groups in the development process of AI systems,  thereby ensuring AI responds to the broadest society needs and  considerations. External Frameworks External ethics review boards may be appealing for small and mediumsized businesses31 that lack the scale required to sustain an internal  ethical review board. Additionally, an external ethics review board  could help develop ethical standards and best practices, providing an  accessible knowledge base. Finally, external frameworks can promote  “outward facing goals,” described by Professor Metcalf as goals to  “protect vulnerable populations, protect the reputation and trust of  the profession by providing a basis for public expectations, [and allow  for an] evaluation of the profession.”32 30 UN Global Pulse, Tools: Risk, Harms and Benefits Assessment, https://www. unglobalpulse. org/privacy/tools. 31 Tene and Polonetsky, supra, n. 30, available at https://scholarlycommons.law.wlu. edu/cgi/ viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&article=1044&context=wlulr-online. 32 Jacob Metcalf, Ethics Codes: History, Context, and Challenges, The Council for Big Data,  Ethics, and Society, (2014) http://bdes.datasociety.net/wp-content/ uploads/2016/10/ EthicsCodes.pdf.
11 One example of how external review boards could function in practice  comes from the idea of Consumer Subject Review Boards (CSRBs)  proposed by Ryan Calo.33 The concept involves forming outside  panels that can review organizations’ proposed projects and suggest  adjustments to meet industry standards. These review boards could  be industry-specific and composed of experts from diverse practices  so that multiple viewpoints are represented in the evaluation process.  Though external IRBs may have limits regarding how specific they can  be in evaluating risk and rewards due to the independent nature of  the boards and presumed volume of requests they will receive, they  could serve as a useful tool to promote transparency and provide  useful feedback. One example of such an external advisory group in the humanitarian  and development sector is the UN Global Pulse Privacy Advisory  Group , comprising regulators, experts from the private and public  sectors, civil society and academia. The Group was established as  part of Global Pulse’s advocacy and policy work around accelerating  responsible data innovation for social good within the UN system. Its  experts provide input on various big data initiatives for social good,  including on privacy policies, guidelines and tools. Another example is  the EDPS Ethics Advisory Group . As explained by Depphine Harou of  the European Data Protection Group, this group explores “the ethical  dimensions of data protection and the relationships between human  rights, technology, and business models.” There are additional examples of cross-industry initiatives examining  ethical implications of AI. The Partnership on AI to Benefit People and  Society (aka, “The Partnership ”) was established to develop and share  best practices within the AI industry. The Partnership includes large  tech companies such as Google, Facebook, Amazon, IBM, Microsoft,  33 Ryan Calo, Consumer Subject Review Boards, 66 Stanford Law Review Online 97 (2013);  also see Omer Tene & Jules Polonetsky, Privacy And Big Data: Making Ends Meet, 66  Stanford Law Review Online 25 (2013).and Apple. The Institute of Business Ethics, a non-profit professional  group based in London, offers a range of services from certifications to  ethical training and tools to implement on an individual and group basis.  The European Business Network for Corporate Social Responsibility is  similar , but has a broader approach, rather than ethics-specific. Other proposals for external frameworks are distinct from the  traditional consulting board. One approach suggests delegating  data access entirely to an external body. Administrative Data  Research Facilities (known as ADRFs) store and regulate access to  already-existing data sets. When an organization or researcher wishes  to use a data set, they must submit a request to the facility. The  facility then evaluates the request, guided by the principle that the  benefits to policy-making must outweigh the costs to individuals.  The facility has freedom to determine if data sets will be available to  the applicant and in what form — for example, after de-identification,  via a data enclave, or only after signing a series of non-disclosure  agreements. One example of this approach is the Kilts Center for  Marketing, a partnership between the University of Chicago Booth  School of Businessand the Nielsen Company. The center “makes  comprehensive marketing datasets available to academic researchers  around the world,” using data donated by Nielsen. Finally, an outside ethical advisory board could be based in a  geographic area. One example is the City of Seattle’s Community  Technology Advisory Board (known as the CTAB), which comprises  local community members and subject-matter experts along with  representatives from different-sized and -focused businesses. The  board meets monthly and discusses best approaches to new and  emerging technologies and any conflict or risk that arises with use of  older technology or data. The minutes of these meetings, contents,  and reports are then made public.34 34 City of Seattle Open Data Risk Assessment, FPF Report, January 2018, available at https:// fpf.org/2018/01/25/examining-the-open-data-movement/.
12 Operationalizing Data Ethics Accountability is the backbone of any data management program,  including where data analytics — and therefore ethical issues — are  involved. Transparency is an important element of accountability,  including in AI, “because transparency builds trust in the system,  by providing a simple way for the user to understand what the  system is doing and why.” In order to maintain transparency, the  IEEE recommends the development of new standards that describe  measurable, testable levels of transparency, so that “systems can be  objectively assessed and levels of compliance determined.”35 One mechanism for enterprise-level accountability is the market  discipline imposed by reputation-harming consequences of poor  publicity and consumer complaints. In Japan, Professor Hiroshi  Miyashita explained, companies that behave unethically are “named  and shamed” and must issue public apologies to make up for their  mistakes and save face. Of course, a better method is to prevent  ethics missteps before they occur. To do this, organizations must  develop data ethics frameworks and adhere to them throughout the  data flow process. When deploying an effective data ethics structure, organizations  should begin by asking a series of questions designed to tailor existing  frameworks to their organization. The participants in the discussions  at the UN GP/IAPP event suggested that organizations consider three  factors in operationalizing ethics: 1) a flexible approach to creating  a privacy and ethics framework; 2) data ethics leadership within the  organization; and 3) establishing tools for ethics impact assessments  or risk assessments that incorporate ethics, to consistently evaluate  company-wide ethics approaches. 35 The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and  Autonomous Systems. Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision For Prioritizing Wellbeing With  Artificial Intelligence And Autonomous Systems, Version 1. IEEE, 2016. http:// standards. ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html.A flexible and holistic approach Both data ethics and privacy are contextual and require a flexible  approach tailored to an organization’s mission, structure, and  management style, as well as to the sensitivity of the data involved. Privacy structures differ greatly between different organizations and  can vary across departments within the same organization. Sales and  marketing teams, focused on revenue generation, have a different  perspective from engineers who are constantly trying new ideas, or  lawyers who attempt to mitigate legal risk. Each of these departments  requires an adapted privacy framework and different training to  ensure relevance and a complete approach to organizational privacy.  Although a flexible approach that is tailored to each individual  organization is practical, the IEEE advocates that every framework  should at its core “be designed and operated in a way that respects  human rights, freedoms, human dignity, and cultural diversity.”36 Similarly, how to deploy ethics frameworks will vary between  departments. While all employees should be aware of the overarching  ethics goals and standards of the organization, specific training must  be flexible and role-based to be most effective. Further, a uniform ethics  framework will not be universally effective across all organizations.  Different types of data require different standards of care. As Christina  Peters, IBM’s Associate General Counsel, put it at the UN GP/IAPP  event, “the right model for operationalizing a privacy and ethics  program depends on context” and “one size is not going to fit all.” Hillary Wandall, General Counsel and Chief Data Governance Officer  at TrustArc, added that when she worked at Merck “ethics and ethical  decision-making were at the heart of the privacy program.” She  36 The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and  Autonomous Systems. Ethically Aligned Design: A Vision For Prioritizing Wellbeing With  Artificial Intelligence And Autonomous Systems, Version 1. IEEE, 2016. http:// standards. ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/autonomous_systems.html.
13 explained that at Merck, a research-driven pharmaceutical company,  data collected (with informed consent) for one purpose might prove  useful in another, and it wasn’t satisfactory to simply say, “the data  is anonymous.” The company worked to develop a comprehensive  data management program that applied accountability throughout  the organization from the highest level of the company to every  department where personal data was used. JoaAnne Stonier, Chief Data Officer at MasterCard, acknowledged  another challenge to data management, which is the urge to “do  good” with data when a company is approached by an academic  researcher or non-profit with a social justice mission. At such times,  organizations with large data sets need to have a protocol that can  be followed by employees as well as management: “Both of them  could be violating certain laws in some jurisdictions, let alone ethics  or human rights concerns.” The IEEE37 recommends, when applicable,  “that designers and developers alike document changes to the  systems in their daily practice … with the highest level of traceability  to document changes and behaviors in the system.” The need for a recognized protocol to determine how to ethically  treat requests for data sets is thus another key component of a data  ethics framework that would need to be assessed by circumstance. At the AI For Good Global Summit, participants in the “Ethics of AI”  session proposed a set of recommendations regarding the ethical  development of AI. Some of the recommendations included: a ) defining a transparent open data policy; b) designing ethics  evaluation procedures; c) developing educational tools that could  communicate the capabilities and limitations of AI to policy  makers, the general public, and business executives; and d)  engaging in a multi-faceted dialogue with various stakeholders to  37 IEEE, Embedding Values into Autonomous Intelligent Systems, https://standards. ieee.org/ develop/indconn/ec/ead_embedding_values.pdf.improve the design process,  awareness and attitude towards the  applications of AI for social good. Leadership Without leadership, privacy and ethics protocols may never be  developed, distributed, and enforced throughout the organization. Chief privacy officers often take up the mantle of consumer  protection and advocacy on privacy, so it stands to reason that there  needs to be someone who does the same for data ethics. IBM’s  Peters stressed the importance of integrating data privacy into a data  governance strategy, within an overall business strategy. Successful  privacy and ethics programs require management “buy-in,” meaning  a willingness to invest time and resources into the programs. This  initial investment pays off by avoiding costly privacy violations and  empowering employees to make informed privacy decisions and  streamline the response process. For example, IBM’s data governance  program uses a software-enabled tool to help employees throughout  the multi-national organization answer routine privacy questions.  Creating this institutional framework and developing a privacy- and  ethics-sensitive culture requires leadership. And “leadership,” as the  ethicist Wolpe put it, “makes all the difference.” Privacy and ethics  issues have to “pervade the organization.” The data ethics leader should function with relative independence.  For example, the model of the data protection officer is described  in the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation as a  form of internal auditor with a data subject ombudsman-like role.  Another example of a more formal governance mechanism is of an  internal ethics leader, an external structure for ethical guidance, or a  combination of the two.
14 An internal ethics leader should be able to communicate with all  departments within the organization and should be kept informed  at each stage of the data gathering and use process. In this way, this  position must function similarly to a chief privacy officer or perhaps  even be the privacy lead. If an organization decides to use the expertise of an external structure  for ethical guidance, the organization will still require an internal  employee or corporate structure to properly incorporate guidance  from the external structure. For most organizations, the chief privacy  officer is currently the most likely internal conduit for this operation. Teamwork Data ethics should be assessed at each point in the data life cycle  (development, storage, data collection, analysis, etc.). To that end,  every employee should have basic data ethics training. Additionally,  representatives of each relevant department should be consulted  when making data decisions. When proposing a new data research  project, for example, the data ethics leader should consult with the  programmers who would create the data collection mechanism,  the researchers proposing the project, public relations and  communications representatives who will present findings and field  criticisms, and any other departments involved. In both internal and external discussions, input from differing  perspectives is essential. Elizabeth Buchanan, an ethicist at the  University of Wisconsin-Stout, noted38: “[I]t’s really important for  boards to have either a data scientist, computer scientist, or IT  security individual. … It’s not just thinking about someone getting  upset about questions on a survey.” 38 Wired, Scientists Are Just as Confused About the Ethics of Big-Data Research as You  (May 20, 2016), https://www.wired.com/2016/05/scientists-just-confused- ethics-big-dataresearch/.Ethics Impact Assessments  Effective privacy programs incorporate an evaluation at every new  stage: development, research, access, storage, sharing, and testing.  One key example of this is in the privacy impact assessments  referenced earlier. PIAs serve to routinely evaluate an organization’s  procedures for collecting, storing, analyzing, and disposing of sensitive  data. Separate PIAs are recommended for every part of the data life  cycle. They serve as a way to ensure best practices, evaluate risks,  prevent missteps, and establish that the organization takes privacy  concerns seriously. PIAs allow organizations to effectively conduct risk management,  ensuring compliance with privacy requirements, identifying mitigation  measures, and effectively classifying the impacts on the use of  the data. By classifying both the positive and negative impacts,  organizations have an additional opportunity to assess ethical  considerations and ensure stronger privacy compliance.  An ethical equivalent that directly addresses ethical goals — an  ethical impact assessment or a CDIA, as earlier referenced —  could serve as a useful tool as well. This could be achieved by  incorporating ethics into a PIA-style process. The UN’s Romanoff  noted that “human rights” — an aspect of data ethics — is a  consideration built directly into the privacy impact assessments  of UN Global Pulse. “Part of having the right framework for  responsible big data use in place,” she said, “is having everyone  in the organization recognize and be aware of the potential risks  linked to data use. Considering ethics in risk assessment can provide  additional insights on the negative and positive impacts of data use  as well as its non-use.” Building ethics and human rights questions  into risk assessments may, for many organizations engaged in data  analytics, be more effective than developing a separate parallel track  for ethical reviews.
15 Human rights and sector-specific considerations Finally, when forming a data ethics framework, organizations must  take into account sector-specific requirements or guidance. These  standards may come from experts in a particular field, from industry  associations, or from professional organizations within a field. Ethical approaches to big data and AI should include protection of  human rights. Decisions to use or not to use big data and AI can  have an adverse impact on the protection of fundamental rights. By  employing a human rights-based approach to big data and AI, adverse  impacts can be mitigated.Professor, ethics, and human rights expert Lorna McGregor suggested  at the AI for Good Global Summit that AI and humans have different  forms of reasoning. “However, autonomous decision making should  not provide a cover for human responsibility and error,” she said.  “Humans should retain control over AI systems and ensure internal  and external oversight.” Each actor at each stage of development and  application of AI should remain responsible, thereby allowing specific  actors within their respective sectors to better determine the ethical  use of AI. Various data ethics frameworks should have common features to  ensure a uniformly high ethical standard of data practices. However,  these frameworks will be most effective if they are flexible enough  to be tailored for each specific company and organization, adjusting  for a company’s size, resources, subject matter area, and impact on  data subjects. Overall, ensuring ethical parity between commercial  applications and deployment of data for social use is crucial to  safeguarding the ethical development of new technologies across all  sectors and will lead to greater trust in technology and acceptance from  the general public. Conclusion Data ethics serves to address areas of consumer protection and data  stewardship that are beyond the reach of the traditional privacy  practices. A model privacy program’s existing structure, however,  serves as an ideal foundation for adding ethical checks and balances. With the proper investment in ethics leadership and awareness  training, along with adding ethics assessments and frameworks to  existing privacy programs, organizations will go a long way toward  finding the appropriate balance between protecting consumer  information and trust, and using big data to its fullest potential and  for the greater good.Building the future privacy — and ethics — program Privacy professionals need a broad range of skills — technical,   ethical, and legal. Privacy lawyers need to possess awareness of privacy, technology, and  ethics. Technologists require legal, ethical, and privacy knowledge.  Ethicists need privacy, legal, and tech awareness. Though professional training and certifications can assist in providing  knowledge and skills in needed areas, educational institutions and  businesses must recognize the need for a comprehensive approach  to privacy. Several institutions are already combining tech, ethics,  and law in innovative ways to create multidisciplinary professional  programs built to meet modern workforce needs.
16 The UN GP/ IAPP event brought together experts from various fields,  acknowledging the fact that there is a need to approach data use  from a multidisciplinary perspective and that collaboration between  various stakeholders is necessary and fundamental for big data to be  a transformative force for good.  The Secretary-General  of the United Nations recently in his Web  Summit 2017 speech noted that “to avoid the mistakes of the  past” and to “maximize the potential of the enormous advantages  that the innovations we are discussing can provide to our world,” it is important  to build collaboration and dialogue between  stakeholders. Developing stronger frameworks for data privacy and  ethics in general will also, no doubt, require efforts from different  experts in numerous sectors. And no doubt we should remember  that, “just as misuse of AI may lead to harm, non-use of AI may allow  preventable harms to occur.”39 39 Information and Communication for Development (ICT4D 2018) Data Driven Development,  Section on Big Data for Social Good, Digital Ethics, M. Romanoff, M. Luengo Oroz, R.  Kirkpatrick, P . Biggs, F. Vacaleru (World Bank, 2018- pending). 
