







AI Ethics | IBM





























































Home




Impact



AI Ethics




                    



  
    AI ethics






    


                



 


  
  
      IBM is helping to advance responsible AI with a multidisciplinary, multidimensional approach
  




    





Learn about foundation model ethics







































  



    Now is the moment for responsible AI





    


            
        




Businesses are facing an increasingly complex, ever-changing global regulatory landscape when it comes to AI. The IBM approach to AI ethics balances innovation with responsibility, helping you adopt trusted AI at scale.








            Point of view
        

            Foundation models: Opportunities, risks and mitigations.
        

Read the paper





Fostering a more ethical future by leveraging technology




Case study: Building trust in AI
















                                



  
    Latest updates






    


                            






















                Fostering greater transparency across the data ecosystem
            
Co-created by IBM, the Data & Trust Alliance's new Data Provenance Standards offer a first-of-their-kind metadata taxonomy to support transparency about data provenance.

Learn about the standards


















                IBM Granite models named a strong performer in The Forrester Wave™
            
This recognition validates IBM’s differentiated approach to delivering enterprise-grade foundation models, helping clients accelerate the adoption of gen AI into their business workflows while mitigating foundation model-related risks.

Learn more about Granite models


















                Three critical steps toward EU AI Act compliance
            
The EU AI Act has ushered in a new era for AI governance. What do you need to know and do to achieve compliance?

Read the article


















                How can new Chief AI Officers balance trust and innovation?
            
Three IBM leaders offer their insights on the significant opportunities and challenges facing new CAIOs in their first 90 days.

Get the insights


















                An updated perspective on foundation models
            
Learn about strategies and tools that can help mitigate the unique risks posed by foundation models.

Read the blog


















                AI ethics in sustainability
            
Learn how the responsible development and deployment of AI technology can be better for people and the planet.

Read the blog


















                What policymakers can do about deepfakes, right now
            
IBM leaders Christina Montgomery and Joshua New outline three key priorities for policymakers to mitigate the harms of deepfakes.

Read more














  



    Our principles and pillars





    


        


                
                


  
  
      The Principles for Trust and Transparency are the guiding values that distinguish the IBM approach to AI ethics.
  




    


                
            


Read the Principles for Trust and Transparency









        



  
    The purpose of AI is to augment human intelligence






    


    



IBM believes AI should make all of us better at our jobs, and that the benefits of the AI era should touch the many, not just the elite few.






        



  
    Data and insights belong to their creator






    


    



IBM clients’ data is their data, and their insights are their insights. We believe that government data policies should be fair and equitable and prioritize openness.






        



  
    Technology must be transparent and explainable






    


    



Companies must be clear about who trains their AI systems, what data was used in training and, most importantly, what went into the recommendations of their algorithms.











                
                


  
  
      The Principles are supported by the Pillars of Trust, our foundational properties for AI ethics.

 
  




    


                
            





        



  
    Explainability






    


    



Good design does not sacrifice transparency in creating a seamless experience.



AI Explainability 360
            
        




        



  
    Fairness






    


    



Properly calibrated, AI can assist humans in making choices more fairly.



AI Fairness 360
            
        




        



  
    Robustness






    


    



As systems are employed to make crucial decisions, AI must be secure and robust.




Adversarial Robustness 360
            
        




        



  
    Transparency






    


    



Transparency reinforces trust, and the best way to promote transparency is through disclosure.




AI FactSheets 360
            
        




        



  
    Privacy






    


    



AI systems must prioritize and safeguard consumers’ privacy and data rights.




AI Privacy 360 toolkit
            
        














  



    Ethics for generative AI





    


            




When ethically designed and responsibly brought to market, generative AI capabilities support unprecedented opportunities to benefit business and society alike.


















Point of view
Foundation models: Opportunities, risks and mitigations

                
                    Read the paper
                
                

            








                AI governance
            

                The CEO’s Guide to Generative AI: Platforms, data, governance and ethics
            
Human values are at the heart of responsible AI.

Find out why




                AI governance
            

                The urgency of AI governance
            
IBM and the Data & Trust Alliance
offer insights about the need for
governance, particularly in the era of
generative AI.

Read the perspective




                White paper
            

                A policymaker’s guide to foundation models
            
A risk- and context-based approach to AI regulation can mitigate potential risks, including those posed by foundation models.

Read the white paper















  



    Putting principles into action





    


                
            



The IBM AI Ethics Board is at the center of IBM’s commitment to trust. Its mission is to:
Provide governance and decision-making as IBM develops, deploys, and uses AI and other technologiesMaintain consistency with the company’s valuesAdvance trustworthy AI for our clients, our partners and the world
Co-chaired by Francesca Rossi and Christina Montgomery, the Board sponsors workstreams that deliver thought leadership, policy advocacy and education and training about AI ethics to drive responsible innovation and the advancement and improvement of AI and emerging technologies. It also assesses use cases that raise potential ethical concerns.
The Board is a critical mechanism by which IBM holds our company and all IBMers accountable to our values and commitments to the ethical development and deployment of technology.
Learn more about ethical impact in the 2023 IBM Impact Report
Take a look inside IBM's AI ethics governance framework
 




















                IBM fellow and AI Ethics Global Leader
            

                Francesca Rossi
            
Learn more about Francesca 



















                Vice President and Chief Privacy and Trust Officer
            

                 Christina Montgomery 
            
Learn more about Christina













  



    Policies and perspectives





    


            


IBM advocates for policies that balance innovation with responsibility and trust to help build a better future for all. 







IBM's five best practices for including and balancing human oversight, agency and accountability over decisions across the AI lifecycle.

Learn more
            
        





IBM’s recommendations for policymakers to mitigate the harms of deepfakes.

Learn more
            
        





IBM’s recommendations for policymakers to preserve an open innovation ecosystem for AI.

Learn more
            
        





These standards can inform auditors and developers of AI on what protected characteristics should be considered in bias audits and how to translate those into data points required to conduct these assessments.

Learn more
            
        





IBM recommends policymakers consider two distinct categories of data-driven business models and tailor regulatory obligations proportionate to the risk they pose to consumers.

Learn more
            
        





Policymakers should understand the privacy risks that neurotechnologies pose as well as how they work and what data is necessary for them to function.

Learn more
            
        





Five priorities to strengthen the adoption of testing, assessment and mitigation strategies to minimize bias in AI systems.

Learn more
            
        





Companies should utilize a risk-based AI governance policy framework and targeted policies to develop and operate trustworthy AI.

Learn more
            
        




























        



  
    watsonx.governance






    


    


            


  
  
      Accelerate responsible, transparent and explainable data and AI workflows.

 
   
  




    


        



            Learn more
            
        

            Get the AI governance ebook
            
        












                                



  
    Partnerships and collaborations






    


                            






















                AI governance trends to watch
            
IBM’s Global Leader for Responsible AI Initiatives, Dr. Heather Domin, discusses how regulation, collaboration, and skills demand are shaping the AI governance landscape

Read the article 


















                Proactively generating value with AI ethics
            
Experts from IBM and University of Notre Dame outline recommendations for getting the best ROI from AI ethics investments.

Get the insights


















                 Partnership on AI shares risk mitigation strategies for the open foundation model value chain
            
With input from IBM, Partnership on AI's new report explores safeguards for open foundation models.

Read the report


















                The Data & Trust Alliance offers new policy roadmap for AI governance
            
Co-authored by IBM, the Data & Trust Alliance's new policy roadmap provides recommendations for balancing AI innovation with AI safety. 

Read the recommendations


















                Promoting AI safety through open innovation
            
At The Futurist Summit, IBM Chief Privacy and Trust Officer Christina Montgomery and Partnership for AI CEO Rebecca Finley discuss the critical relationship between open innovation and AI safety.

Watch the video


















                University of Notre Dame and IBM partner to research ethical challenges of large language models
            
With support from the Notre Dame-IBM Tech Ethics Lab, ten research projects will be undertaken in 2024.

Learn more


















                Pulitzer Center launches program to train 1,000 journalists on AI reporting
            
With support from the Notre Dame-IBM Technology Ethics Lab, the Pulitzer Center launches the AI Spotlight Series, a global training initiative.

Learn more


















                IBM and Meta launch the AI Alliance
            
IBM and Meta launch the AI Alliance in collaboration with over 50 founding members and collaborators globally.

Learn more


















                AI Governance Alliance releases Briefing Paper Series
            
In collaboration with IBM, the World Economic Forum offers three briefing papers to help guide responsible transformation with AI.

Read more


















Next steps




Find out how IBM can help you accelerate your responsible AI journey.





Explore our AI governance services


Discover watsonx.governance









































































