www.kas.deAnalysis of current global    AI developments  with a focus on Europe Olaf Groth Tobias Straube 
Olaf Groth Tobias Straube With the support of: Johannes Glatz Dan Zehr Lauren Hildenbrand Analysis of current global    AI developments  with a focus on Europe
2 At a glance 1. Europe has recognized the potential of AI and is utilizing it. However, the coordination of national  AI strategies in Europe should be improved.   2. With its human-centered approach Europe is a defining norm setting power in the field of AI and  data science, especially in the protection of privacy and human rights. The distinctive European  approach also constitutes a strength of the European AI innovation ecosystem for the international  AI arena.   3. In addition, Europe has the resources to become a leading player in the global AI race. Europe offers  a high degree of automation of its strong industrial base, a great pool of industrial data, an excellent  research and development landscape that generates innovations and AI talents, a high number of  Internet users and a large internal market.   4. At the same time, Europe’s normative strength is associated with weaknesses in regards to its AI  innovation ecosystem – especially in terms of data availability. It is necessary to find ways to realize  European values while at the same time enabling large and high-quality data pools. Other areas that  must be improved are the availability of AI talents and supercomputers, strong dependencies on  foreign semiconductor industries and the commercialization of AI.   5. Furthermore, Europe lacks consistency in the performance of national innovation ecosystems. This  asymmetry poses a risk to Europe’s economic cohesion and thus also to future political stability. 
Contents   Executive summary 4 1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond  7 1.1 Data – Europe’s “Achilles heel”    7 1.2 Talent – A resource to keep    11 1.3 Computing Power – No strategic assets in the EU (yet)   11 1.4 Research – Not world-class across the region    15 1.5 Commercialization – Varying economic readiness    17 2. Summary of the EU’s AI strategy  22 2.1 Similarities and differences of national AI strategies in the EU    22 2.2 An evolving human-centered   24 2.3 The EU and the global AI competition   27 3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership 30 3.1 Expanding the digital economy – the race for the next 3bn internet users     30 3.2 Recasting the data economy   32 3.3 Hardware innovations and the next frontier of computing power     33 3.4 AI Governance, beyond AI ethics and compliance    36 4. The next frontier in AI R&D 41 4.1 Creating and understanding AI or the barrier of contextualization     41 4.2 Explainable AI becoming a key research field     43 4.3 Taming unfathomable AI through accountability     46 5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society  49 5.1 The changing funding landscape of the cognitive age    49 5.2 The underestimated role of smart procurement   50 5.3 Data-driven business model innovation   51 5.4 AI for Public Good and the roles of the public sector and civil society   52 6. Methodology and comments on the analysis 57 6.1 Definition and sources    58
4 Executive summary ments (e. g. GDPR) have hindered possibilities  of industrial data sharing. The EU also struggles  to develop and retain key data science talent.  Although European institutions produce worldclass talent and research in AI-related fields, they  have yet to reach the scale or influence of US and  Chinese institutions, and much of the talent they  develop has migrated to those two countries. Nor  does the EU possess a deep reserve of high-end  computing power, a fundamental requirement for  world-class AI innovation at scale. Finally, while  the climate for commercialization varies from one  EU member state to the next, the overall ecosys tem for innovative risk-taking, technology trans fer, venture investment and startup growth lags  behind that of global AI leaders.   Nevertheless, many strengths remain, and they  underpin the EU’s continued emergence as a crit ical player in the science, geopolitics and ethics  of AI and related fields. To the extent it coalesces  and becomes available to developers, its com mon market can generate a deep pool of data for  cutting-edge R&D. Its leading research institutions  still develop world-class AI talent, and the increas ing digitalization of the existing industrial power  base is starting to generate more local opportu nities for those experts. Furthermore, the region  continues to lead the world in its awareness of  and emphasis on human-centric, private and eth ical uses of AI and data science. These are critical,  indispensable strengths on which the EU – and, in  many respects, the world as a whole – will rely in  the decades to come.   However, these advantages are not enough to  enable the EU to stand on its own as a “Third  Way” alternative to the US and China. Ultimately,  countries will have to individually or collectively  align, at least in part, with a US or Chinese mindset  regarding technology, geopolitics, and economic  development. We have argued elsewhere that the  EU best aligns with the liberal democratic ideas  embodied in the US constitution. For the purposes  of this report, however, we have focused on the The European Union (EU) and its members have  recognized the potential for artificial intelligence  (AI) to drive economic, business and societal pros perity. Critically, they have also recognized many  of the risks that accompany AI and the various  applications and systems it empowers. Many of  these considerations are reflected in the various  national and EU-wide AI strategies and standards.  Perhaps more than any other region or country  in the world, Europe has made human rights and  privacy the “North Star” of its strategies, part nerships, governance, and commercialization of  advanced technologies. This has become a primary strength as the EU  and its members develop their AI ecosystems,  but it also drives many of the region’s key weak nesses. Perhaps nothing exemplifies this duality  better than the General Data Protection Regula tion (GDPR). While the GDPR has become a global  standard for the preservation of individual data  privacy and a key check on the hegemonic power  of the large digital service platforms, its structure  has also curbed innovation, commercialization,  and the collection of massive data pools that drive  the development and training of AI systems. Care ful consideration of ways to calibrate and recali brate their approach to partnerships, governance  and commercialization will allow the EU and its  member states to expand their influence on global  AI development, while fostering a domestic envi ronment that allows their companies and research  institutions to compete more effectively with the  United States of America (USA) and China.   Such calibrations must be based on a deliber ate and clear-eyed understanding of the factors  that currently limit AI development across the  EU. While the EU is home to 446 million resi dents – representing the third-largest market in  the world after India and China – a collective pool  of usable data has not yet coalesced to power AI  research and development (R&D). This is particu larly true for European industry, where concerns  about trade secrets and governance require -
5more robust data-driven economy across the EU.  Similarly, a pan-European regulatory body would  enable a type of “growth with guardrails” that pro motes and enforces privacy and other human-cen tric data protections without sacrificing innovation  and global influence. Establishing shared technical  standards and benchmarks across the EU would  operationalize the region’s ethics and ideals within  AI development in Europe and around the world.  By crafting these new governance and regulatory  models in a way that encourages large European  companies to build smart procurement ecosys tems with startups, the EU would promote more  joint research, accelerate innovation, and create  greater economic resilience.  Recommendations on Governance   (R1), (R8), (R13), (R18) Commercialization:  By rebalancing its regula tory and legal standards, the EU can create an  environment that promotes greater commercial ization of technologies without sacrificing data  privacy and other AI-related concerns. Promot ing cybersecurity and AI safety as an integral part  of national and regional security would channel  more public-sector resources into advanced R&D  and innovation. Fostering greater permeability  between public, military and private digital eco systems would allow the results of that research  to spill over into the private sector. Encourag ing experimentation with new data marketplace  designs could lead to a data exchange model that  preserves privacy, establishes tangible value for  data, and rebuilds trust between individuals and  companies – and thereby leads us into the next  growth horizon for the digital economy. Recal ibrating the governance of and investment in  hardware, perhaps through a CERN-like develop ment hub, would ensure that the EU can build the  AI infrastructure of the future, rather than having  to buy it. Tax policies and publicly backed fundof-funds models would promote venture invest ment that fosters “creative upgrading” rather than  “creative destruction”. By encouraging companies  and entrepreneurs to adopt new business mod els, such as B2B2C and P2P models, the EU would  address problems of data access while preserving  its protections of the individual.  Recommendations on Commercialization   (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19)        EU’s current strengths and weaknesses compared  to other global AI leaders, and how the EU could  enhance its strengths and mitigate its weaknesses.  The report begins with a look at the current state  of AI in Europe and elsewhere, before moving onto  a summary of the EU’s AI strategy. It then looks  at the preconditions for any country or region to  lead in AI development and how those conditions  are changing. This provides a foundation for the  report’s final chapters, which survey the next fron tiers in AI and the forces that will drive uptake of  AI across the economy and society. We include 20  recommendations throughout the course of these  discussions, but each recommendation falls into  one of four main categories – partnerships, govern ance, commercialization, and talent and research. Partnerships:  To enhance strengths and off set weaknesses, the EU should seek to establish  formal collaborations with countries and institu tions outside its borders. Monitoring and securing  its place in global semiconductor supply chains  would safeguard the EU’s access to the computing  power that drives advanced technology devel opment. A special science and innovation zone  between the UK and EU would mitigate potential  losses from Brexit. An Indo-Pacific partnership on  AI would establish the EU as a leading force for  the protection of a liberal world order, while also  deepening ties to the Global South, where new  Digital Economy Agreements would establish dig ital trade rules and collaborations across multiple  economies. Despite their current differences, an  EU-US sequential bridging model would enhance  their shared values and provide other countries  with a crucial alternative to China’s Belt and Road  Initiative. All of these alliances could help the EU  to champion the use of AI for public good, seeding  vital breakthroughs in health care, climate change,  education and other fields currently underserved  by the private sector.  Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20) Governance: The EU can solidify its global lead ership in ethical and human-centric AI govern ance, but it must continue to evolve its stand ards to maintain that crucial authority. Improving  and harmonizing administrative processes would  accelerate the creation of a digital single mar ket, facilitate trusted data sharing, and foster a Executive Summary
6tise in Europe to drive innovation at the nexus of  various advanced-technology fields. As AI powers  increasingly sophisticated and invasive applica tions and technologies, the EU’s ability to estab lish clear, tangible and actionable frameworks for  trustworthy AI would ensure that it is prepared to  safeguard against brain-computer interfaces and  other near-future technologies that will shape our  lives in currently unknown ways.  Recommendations on Talent and Research  (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16) The recommendations in this report do not rep resent an exhaustive list of strategies the EU and  its member countries could employ. However,  each of these suggestions would allow the EU to  expand its capacity for AI development and com mercialization without sacrificing its commitment  to ethical and human-centric AI standards.Talent and Research:  The EU can take a leading  role in shaping future AI trends if it recognizes  and capitalizes on the fact that the experts and  researchers who drive progress work across a  range of geographies and academic disciplines.  While talent outflows reflect the weakness of the  European digital economy, tapping into the same  outflows to forge international talent networks  and training programs would help the EU to cap ture more value from the expertise its institutions  produce. Tax policies that promote investment in  labor upskilling over technology spending would  foster more corporate investment in such initia tives, while programs that frame AI as a multidisci plinary field of research would allow EU academic  institutions to build on existing strengths in fields  that intersect with AI (e. g. climate and peace and  conflict research). Closer to computer science  itself, creating a European Center of Excellence for  “contextual AI” would leverage the existing exper -Executive Summary
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond7 others.2 One of the EU’s strengths is that it collec tively encompasses a market of considerable size  and scale with a data pool that could help pro duce powerful AI systems. Benchmarking more  than 20 data-points as proxies for AI readiness  reveals country clusters that correlate with geo graphical regions, highlighting a fragmentation of  the EU along five, partially overlapping regions.3  Understanding and addressing the strengths and  weaknesses of these regions will highlight the col lective strengths upon which the EU can build. 1.1. Data – Europe’s “Achilles heel” Data, the fuel of the emerging AI age, comes from  four primary sources: individuals, companies,  governments, and other AI systems (in the form  of synthetically generated data). Because it lags in  the consumer data space, Europe aims to position  itself in the global landscape with AI strategies  that rely more heavily on enterprise and govern ment data.Since the first initiative launched by the Obama  administration in 2016, more than 50 countries  have adopted national AI strategies, elevating AI  as an issue of geopolitical importance. Follow ing the publication of a comparative study of  national AI strategies, a number of organizations  have set up systems to monitor the outcome of  AI promotion and the implementation of these  national plans, making AI policy a subject of study  in itself and pushing it into other subject areas  (e. g. industrial promotion, education, and defense  and security). These monitoring initiatives, most  notably the second edition of Stanford’s AI Index,  the OECD’s AI Policy Observatory, and the EU’s  AI Watch,1 provide a more granular picture of AI  readiness in the EU (see Annex 1). Based on this,  we can compare the oft-touted narrative of a  strong research and manufacturing landscape as  key pillars for building an EU-focused AI model  with the reality. As a benchmark, we have cho sen the EU member states, Norway, Switzerland  and the UK as well as countries that we consider  global leaders, including the US, China and eight 1. Current state of AI     in the EU and beyond 
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond8 the “Achilles’ heel” of the EU’s Data Strategy (see  Chapter 2.2).9 Other external factors will also influ ence data sharing, including many dynamics that,  at first glance, have little to do with digital systems.  In particular, the diversity of domestic regulations  in individual EU member states will present bar riers for the generalization of data created in the  region. For example, even if collective data on the  creditworthiness of EU companies and individuals  would become available for the training of AI-pow ered financial services, it would have limited use  because insolvency law – and thus the data on the  financial health of companies – is not harmonized  across the EU. Recommendation 1 – Improve legal frame works and harmonize administrative pro cesses:  Speeding up the creation of the digital  single market, experimenting with different forms  of data sharing mechanisms (e. g. data trustees, a  concept pioneered by the German government)10  and advancing standardization for data sharing  and data-sharing interfaces are key to fostering  a data-driven economy across the EU. However,  a coherent legal framework for the digital single  market needs to go beyond core digital domains  and intertwine with the broader economic inte gration of the region. For example, fragmentation  in insolvency laws – that impede the generaliza bility of financial data (see above) – runs deeper  than the differences between the many languages  spoken throughout the EU. Addressing the full  array of different obstacles will require new ways  to align some of these laws – perhaps, for exam ple, in the context of the “data spaces’’ foreseen in  the EU’s data strategy (see Chapter 2.2). However,  a legal framework alone will not foster a digital  single market in which privacy is assured. In addi tion to rules and regulations, it will require the  harmonization of administrative processes and an  agreement between organizations on issues such  as standardized technical interfaces. Data-sharing  advisers deployed and networked across the EU,  similar to the AI trainers foreseen in the German  National AI Strategy, could help organizations  ensure legal certainty and technical feasibility for  their data-sharing initiatives.  Recommendations on Governance    (R1), (R8), (R13), (R18)  The size of the EU data pool generated by individ uals and end-users, as measured by the number  of internet users, expanded to 397 million in 2019  (474 million when including Norway, UK and Swit zerland), trailing only China (854 million) and India  (560 million).4 Platform companies such as Face book, Twitter, Google, Tencent and Baidu have had  the biggest success in tapping into these pools, col lecting and storing data from individuals to contin uously improve their algorithms and services. With  only 3 percent of the world’s data-platform mar ket capitalized by European companies and only  two significant B2C platforms (Sweden’s Spotify  and Germany’s Zalando), the EU lacks actors that  could shape the AI age with a European point of  view.5 The EU’s failure to capitalize on the world’s  third-largest population of data producers (i. e.  internet users) means that being more proactive  with respect to AI development in the region’s  industrial sector is critically important.  The EU, and Germany in particular, sits on a  wealth of data from modern factories and worldclass automation and robotics capabilities. For  example, Europe reached a new peak of more  than 75,000 robot units installed in 2018, with  Germany among the top five major markets for  robots worldwide (in comparison: US organiza tions installed about 55.000 units).6 In addition, the  data spheres, albeit not yet integrated, in Europe,  the Middle East and Africa are expected to grow  to 43.3 zettabytes in 2025 – larger than the US at  30.6 zettabytes7 – with 22 percent coming from  production activities and 19 percent from the  Internet of Things (IoT).8 While only a fraction is  currently labeled (3 percent globally) and analyzed  (0.5 percent globally), this data and know-how,  when processed by AI, has the potential to change  the face of manufacturing and production around  the world. Recognizing this potential, the EU has  set out to focus on AI in the economy as part of  the broader framework of Industry 4.0. However,  this requires effective mechanisms to access and  exchange this industry data – a tricky task as com panies fear risking the loss of competitive advan tages when they share data. If the EU’s AI strate gies do not address this concern, few companies  will participate and share data with entrepreneurs,  potential competitors or researchers, making this 
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond9 AI professional density by country EU+ Average EU AverageSingapore Canada UAE South Korea JapanIsrael Russia India 0,4 ChinaUSASwitzerland NorwayUnited Kingdom 47,8 Sweden Spain SloveniaSlovakia RomaniaPortugal PolandNetherlands MaltaLuxembourg LithuaniaLatviaItalyIreland HungaryGreece GermanyFranceFinland EstoniaDenmark 27,3 CzechiaCyprus CroatiaBulgariaBelgium Austria 0 20 10 30 40 50 70 90 110 60 80 100 120Country EURegion EU+ Other# of AI professionals per 1 million population
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100EU+ AverageEU Average Singapore CanadaUAE South Korea JapanIsrael Russia IndiaChinaUSASwitzerland Norway United KingdomSweden SpainSlovenia Slovakia RomaniaPortugal PolandNetherlands MaltaLuxembourg Lithuania Latvia ItalyIreland HungaryGreeceGermany FranceFinland EU EU+ OtherCountry Regions Estonia Denmark CzechiaCyprus CroatiaBulgariaBelgium Austria Digital skillsMeasure names Future work skillsSkills level on a range from  0–100 (No country scored < 40)Digital skills and future work skills by country and region 10
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond11 especially in the US, which can also benefit the  European economy – provided networks support  the return of knowledge. The EU can facilitate this  repatriation of knowledge through virtual and  part-time secondment programs. In this way, AI  experts could support the European economy  without having to leave their new home outside  Europe. In order to leverage the existing tal ent base within Europe itself, EU member states  should reconsider their tax schemes for compa nies as they seek to rebound from the COVID-19  pandemic. Changes to tax policies should focus on  making advanced (corporate) training programs  tax-deductible in a manner that incentivizes the  upskilling of personnel. While general tax incen tives allow companies to create cash reserves or  savings, which helps them respond quickly to dis ruption, companies will not invest those resources  in human labor if the same investment in technol ogy, particularly in software, will yield greater pro ductivity.16 Thus, tax incentives should target (cor porate) training programs that provide humans  with a defensible edge over machines and will  help workers to transition to more future-resilient  jobs, in which machines are used to unburden  and augment humans, not take their jobs.  Recommendations on Talent and Research  (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16) 1.3 Computing Power –   No strategic assets in the EU (yet) If data is the fuel of the modern global economy,  then computing power and semiconductors are  its engines. Complex AI used in pharmaceuti cal research, climate change modelling or other  deep tech research requires access to super computers. Of the top 500 supercomputers in  June 2020, 76 were located in the EU (equaling  0.17 per 1 million inhabitants) with an additional  15 in the UK, Norway and Switzerland combined.  This compares to 117 in the US (0.35 per 1 million  inhabitants) and 228 in China (0.15 per 1 million  inhabitants). Depending on the complexity and  strategic importance of a project, AI can also be  trained through computing power based in the  cloud or in private data centers. However, despite  the critical importance of semiconductor design  and production for AI training and applications, 1.2 Talent – A resource to keep Countries cannot fully research and commercialize  AI opportunities, nor manage the associated risks  of AI systems, without a data-savvy and digitally  literate population. The EU ranks second on the  basic digital skills of the active workforce (i. e. com puter skills, basic coding, digital reading), ahead of  China, Russia and India, but trailing the AI lead ership group of nations, which includes the US,  Israel, the UK, South Korea, and Singapore. How ever, vast differences exist within Europe. Cen tral and Northern Europe are home to a digitally  skilled active workforce and have better frame works in place for future skills development, while  Southern and Eastern Europe lag on this meas ure.11 The assessment is similar when looking more  narrowly at AI professionals per capita (i. e. the  number of AI professionals per one million inhab itants). Despite vast differences between EU mem ber states, the region as a whole falls well behind  leading nations such as Singapore, the UK, the US,  and Canada.12 It is therefore understandable – and,  in fact, critical – that all EU AI strategies focus on  talent development and talent retention to coun ter “brain drain” to more attractive research eco systems. Of all AI researchers and current students  in the field who completed their undergraduate  studies in the EU, less than half (46 percent) deploy  their skills in the EU. A quarter end up working in  the US, either in graduate programs or after fully  completing their education within the EU.13, 14 How ever, these numbers might be impacted due to  the tightening of US immigration policy, including  the White House’s controversial move to ban new  international students.15 While the training and  availability of AI and data scientists is critical for  any country to benefit from the AI, operationaliz ing AI needs developers and engineers, AI-savvy  business experts, and product developers. This  talent is more likely to emerge from corporate  training programs or skill-focused, rather than  degree-focused, educational programs.  Recommendation 2 – Create global AI talent  networks and foster advanced (corporate)  training programs.  While the outflow of AI tal ent shows the weakness of the European digital  economy, it also offers an opportunity. European  AI experts gain access to ecosystems abroad, 
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond12 PolandFinlandCzechiaAustriaUAEIndia SwitzerlandNorway SwedenSpainSouth KoreaRussiaSingaporeItalyCanadaUnited KingdomIrelandEU+ Average NetherlandsGermanyFranceJapanEU AverageUSAChinaCountry 0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0 0 50 150 200 Supercomputers per million population100 EUSupercomputers Region EU+ Otheronly three companies globally currently have the  capacity to produce the most advanced, 5-to-10nano meter chips – TMSC (Taiwan), Samsung Elec tronics (South Korea), and Intel (US).17 Given their  central role in the digital and hybrid analog/digital  economy, semiconductors have become a core  issue in the trade conflict between the US and  China, elevating semiconductors alongside AI as  an issue of geopolitical importance.In Europe, Germany’s Infineon or Bosch and Aus tria’s AT&S manufacture chips for major clients  (e. g. Apple), but EU-produced chips accounted  for just 9 percent of the global market in 2018.18  In the hopes of catching up with the current state  of “China, America and silicon supremacy”,19 the  EU has started the Electronic Components and  Systems for European Leadership Joint Undertak ing (ECSEL JU), which aims to fund key strategic  pillars via their lighthouse projects: Industry4.0,  Mobility.E, and Health.E.20 In addition, the Euro -Number of supercomputers and supercomputers per capita per country (Not shown countries have no supercomputer)
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond13 “systemic relevance”. Finding adequate responses  to global supply chain disruptions requires an  in-depth understanding of global actors in the  industry and the dynamics at play in the value cre ation of chips. Complementing existing AI obser vatories at the national and EU level, a semicon ductor observatory could provide intelligence  for informed policy decisions. However, the EU  should also ensure continuous access to the chip  supply chain by creating complementary capaci ties in the value creation of semiconductors. Ded icated special economic zones (or clusters) could  serve as building blocks for EU-based niche play ers and attract international firms in this space,  from which European actors could gain knowhow for building complementary assets, such as  firmware (software that resides in the chip). These  closer international interactions and knowledge  transfers would help the EU to secure access  to semiconductor supply chains. The support  scheme provided by the German government to  Bosch’s chip production in Dresden in 2017 could  serve as a blueprint for such special economic  zones,23 if opened to a broader range of actors. Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20) pean Processor Initiative (EPI), funded through  the EU’s Horizon 2020 program, could help reduce  European dependency on this core technology21  or, alternatively, integrate Europe within the value  chains of US, Korean and Japanese supercomput ing via complementary assets. At its core, the EPI  is focused on advancing European capabilities in  the areas of High-Performance Computing (HPC),  energy-efficient general purpose computing,  research in the traditional sciences (e. g. chemis try and physics), and deep learning architectures  aimed at high-efficiency inference in the industrial  and automotive sectors.22  Recommendation 3 – Monitor and secure  access to global supply chains in the semicon ductor industry:  Although intellectual property,  commoditized code, and data are key elements  of any digital economy, they all flow easily across  borders. The remaining backbone element, com puting power, remains tied to a physical location.  Despite the widespread availability of computing  power through the cloud, connecting with it or  building cloud servers requires dedicated hard ware and core talent. Hence, semiconductors –  the building blocks of computing power – have  become assets of geopolitical importance and 
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyondH-Index, number of AI research papers, and AI research density by country EU+ Average Average Average Total EU Average Average AverageSingaporeCanada UAESouth KoreaJapan Israel RussiaIndiaChinaUSA Switzerland NorwayUnited Kingdom SwedenSpain Slovenia Slovakia RomaniaPortugalPolandNetherlands MaltaLuxembourg Lithuania LatviaItaly Ireland HungaryGreeceGermany France Finland EstoniaDenmarkCzechia Cyprus Croatia BulgariaBelgium Austria 0100 200 300 400 50K 0K 100K 150K 010 20 30 40 50 60Country H-Index Number of AI research papers AI researchers per million population EURegion EU+ OtherTotal 14
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond15 more, the average influence of AI-related publica tions (75.8) measured in terms of the H-Index lags  the other two leading AI research nations (US: 465  and China: 236), with a wide range across the  European countries. One reason for the low H-In dex is likely the fact that many papers are pub lished in languages other than English, which can  decrease citation rates. Efforts to improve the EU’s  influence on the research landscape would face  additional headwinds under the proposed fund ing cuts to Horizon Europe, with funding slashed  to €75.9 billion (plus €5 billion from the COVID-19  recovery fund).25 The European Parliament, which  wanted €120 billion for Horizon Europe, can still  veto the settlement. Recommendation 4 – Foster AI as a cross-cut ting academic discipline.  AI, especially its  machine learning subfield, has started to find  its entrance into academic programs outside of  computer science.  Peace and conflict research ers are using AI models to predict the outbreak of  conflicts, and climate science uses it for weather  forecasts. While the promotion of AI dedicated  computer science programs remains of para mount importance, the EU must find ways to  make a basic introduction to AI and ML a corner stone across academic programs – for example,  by integrating it into general courses such as the  “Introduction to Scientific Work” offered in many  German university programs.  Recommendations on Talent and Research   (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16)1.4 Research – Not world-class   across the region Europe possesses a strong international research  landscape. Across the EU, Norway, Switzer land and the UK, scholarly output on AI as  measured by SCImago Journal & Country Rank   totaled 223,879 publications between 1996 and  2018 – 1.7 times greater than the output of China  (131,001) and 1.8 times greater than the output of  the US (122,617). However, the research strengths  vary widely across the region and do not always  achieve world class standards – in some cases they  fall well below. EU member states are home to far  fewer AI researchers on average when compared  with other research-forward countries. With the  exception of Malta, no member state had as many  AI researchers per capita as Singapore, Switzer land, the US, Israel, the UK, or Canada.24 Based  on this measure, the UK is the strongest research  location in Europe. While the Scandinavian coun tries lead within the EU, most Eastern and South ern European countries play a marginalized role  in AI research at best, often relying on research  collaboration with researchers in other nations.  On average, 43 percent of all AI-related research  publications originating from a EU member state  are written by at least two authors in different  countries – an indicator for the academic network  strength of each country. In this regard, the EU  trails only the UAE (65%), Singapore (61%), Nor way, the UK and Switzerland (combined average  58%), Canada (48%), and Israel (44%). Further -
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond16 EU+ Average  EU AverageSingaporeCanada UAESouth KoreaJapan Israel RussiaIndiaChinaUSA Switzerland NorwayUnited Kingdom SwedenSpain Slovenia Slovakia RomaniaPortugalPolandNetherlands MaltaLuxembourg Lithuania LatviaItaly Ireland HungaryGreeceGermany France Finland EstoniaDenmarkCzechia Cyprus Croatia BulgariaBelgium Austria EURegion EU+ Other0 20 40 60 50 100 150 0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 80 0 100 Software spending score (based on % of GDP, USA = 100)R&D top 1,000 companies in IT (in billion)AI funding per capita (Q1 2016–Q1 2020)CountrySoftware spending, R&D spending an AI funding density by country
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond17 The government and public sector play key roles  in regulating emerging technologies such as AI,  but they also are key drivers of the support and  the development of innovation – both as an inves tor (e. g. public funding of fundamental research,  directly through research programs, and indirectly  through university funding) and as a market maker  (e. g. the sheer volume of public procurement).29  The latter can be given a number. Public procure ment accounts on average for 12 percent of GDP  in OECD countries, while general public-sector  expenditure can account for 35 to 60 percent of  GDP.30 In Germany alone, the digitization of the  public sector could save citizens 84 million hours  per year.31 This potential is anything but theoreti cal. Estonia has already digitized 99 percent of its  public services, with only weddings, divorces, and  real-estate transactions still requiring face-to-face  interaction with a civil servant.32 However, across  the EU as a whole, governmental purchasing deci sions on average provided fewer technology inno vation incentives than in all other countries in the  sample with the exception of Canada.  As we now enter a likely low-growth period as a  consequence of COVID-19, this lack of incentives  presents a missed opportunity. The comprehen sive government stimulus packages indicate the  return of the “strong” state, with the power to  create new markets and incentivize AI-powered  innovation. However, once again, public procure ment of advanced technologies tends to be low  across the EU as a whole, and it varies greatly on a  country level. A clear divide exists again between  Western and Northern European countries such  as Germany (84.2), Luxembourg (78.2), Sweden  (65) and The Netherlands (60.5) on one side, and  mainly Eastern European countries such as Croa tia (12.9), Romania (13.7), Greece (18.5) and Slove nia (22.8) on the other. However, it is important to  note that government procurement of advanced  technology does not automatically necessarily  translate into better public sector services. 1.5 Commercialization –   Varying economic readiness The EU’s manufacturing base, often considered a  key focus of the continent’s industrial and tech nology policy, is at risk of missing an important  upgrade. On average, companies in the EU invest  less in emerging technologies26 than all other  countries in the sample except Russia.27 How ever, wide regional differences exist here, too.  Above-average investment in emerging technolo gies generally occurs more frequently in Western  and Northern Europe than in Eastern and South ern Europe, thanks largely to the concentration  of public ICT companies with large R&D budgets  such as Nokia in Finland, Telefonaktiebolaget LM  Ericsson in Sweden, SAP in Germany, and semi conductor firms such as NXP and ASML Holding  in the Netherlands. The large public ICT compa nies based in these four countries accounted for  four-fifths of the USD 25.8 billion spent on R&D  by all the EU-based ICT companies ranked among  the world’s 1,000 largest public companies. These  disparities within the EU further exacerbate a  relative lack of investment in emerging technol ogies overall.28 The total R&D budget of the EU’s  leading ICT firms was a fraction of the R&D budget  of their counterparts in the US (USD 151.2 billion),  although still ahead of Japan (USD 21.5 billion),  South Korea (USD 21.1 billion), and China (USD  19.1 billion). Furthermore, from an AI startup  funding perspective, investments in young com panies in the EU between Q1 2016 and Q1 2020  (USD 180 billion) trailed far behind the investment  volume in the US (USD 877 billion) and China (USD  458 billion). In terms of AI startup funding per cap ita (AI startup funding per one million inhabitants),  the situation looks even more dire. Although the  average ratio in the EU (USD 406) is better than  in China (318), it is far behind Singapore (4,060),  the US (2,697), UAE (1,176) and Canada (987) – a  shortfall that underscores the need for action to  make the EU economy future-ready. When assess ing the agility of legal framework conditions for  digital businesses, we find that digitally advanced  nations adapt their legal frameworks faster than  those EU member states which need to do more  to promote a digital economy.
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond18 ZOOM OUT: AI in the   EU member states –   an incoherent landscape Eastern Europe: Deficient public  sector commitment, weak research  landscape, and lack of commercial ization. The combination of a lack of  government procurement of technolo gies (–29% compared to the EU average),  lower levels of ICT use and efficiency  (–41%), and inefficient legal frameworks  for digital businesses (–18%) leads to  minimal rates of successful commer cialization in this cluster. This results in  significant shortcomings in the private  sector and lack of investments (–36%),  as signaled by private sector R&D (–98%)  and startup funding (–89%). However,  there is a ray of hope. Despite few inter national research collaborations and  publications in comparison to the EU  overall, the impact of research from  this cluster is disproportionately strong.  Hence, strengthening international  research ties to Eastern Europe could  tap significant potential. Central and Northern Europe: Strong  overall investments and applications,  including impactful research, possi ble improvements in tech exports and  digital skills.  This cluster of countries  is characterized by a general leadership  across all metrics. On average, these  countries are 66% higher on all measured AI related capabilities, with a special focus on  international research collaboration and impactful AI publications, ICT efficiency, enter prise R&D and AI investments. Although generally leading, they are only on par with the  European average regarding high tech exports, future work skills and digital skills of the  current workforce, which leaves room for improvement. Northern and Southeastern Europe: Skilled population but economically and tech nologically disadvantaged.  A lack of private and research investments by public compa nies in the ICT industry have left this cluster lagging, measuring only half the EU average.  It especially lacks supercomputing capacity and researchers. While internet penetration is  just below the average, this cluster profits from EU-enabled ICT regulation, strong cyber security levels, and digital and future work skills of the general population that are on par  with the EU average, signaling strong potential for incentives that encourage investment  in the private and research sectors. Netherlands France Germany Bulgaria Greece Slovenia Latvia Estonia Lithuania Slovakia Czechia Poland Austria Hungary Sweden Croatia Rumania Finland Cyprus Malta Belgium Ireland Denmark Portugal Spain Italy LuxembourgCentral and Northern EuropeCluster regions Northern and South-East Europe West European Belt Eastern Europe  Others
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond19 Recommendation 5 – Promote cybersecurity  and AI safety as drivers for innovation and   commercialization.  Promoting the commer cialization of AI is a multidimensional task that  requires the consideration of all recommenda tions contained in this study. However, while most  of these recommendations look at governance,  academic and private-sector initiatives, the EU  should also consider the military’s role as a stra tegic actor in the digital ecosystem. Likewise, it  should consider security and safety as drivers of  innovation, not just military domains. Within the  broader public sector, the military is a key inves tor in the research, development, and commer cialization of advanced technologies. Because the  spillover effects into other industries can be sig nificant – as the US and Israel demonstrate – the West European Belt:  Scientifically impactful high-potentials.  Featuring a high level  of impact in academic research (+50%) and an above average measure of AI researchers  and professionals in the market (+23%), there is untapped potential for small research  and commercialization volume that could shore up lagging high tech exports (–24%) and  private R&D (–54%). Luxembourg and Malta: Special Characters.  Fueled by the strong public sector appli cation of AI and their unique positioning for headquarter locations, both these countries  lead enterprise AI funding (+331% on average between the two), AI professional density  in Luxembourg (+522%), and researcher density in Malta, (+441%). However, while fund ing is allocated to the countries for tax reasons, the actual intellectual impact is spread  across Europe, essentially making both countries the administrative mailboxes of AI com panies rather than effective and vital AI ecosystems. EU should foster greater permeability between  its military and digital ecosystems. Achieving this  will require the introduction of entrepreneur ial training components in the cyber units of EU  member states’ militaries, creating a European  network of the emerging civil and military innova tion agencies (e. g. the Federal Agency for Dis ruptive Innovation or the Cyber Innovation Hub  in Germany). The EU can further enhance these  cybersecurity efforts through closer collabora tion with the Joint European Disruptive Initiative  (JEDI), the US Defense Advanced Research Project  Agency (DARPA) and the new Israel-UAE alliance  to advance operational capacity and automation  beyond autonomous weapon systems.  Recommendations on Commercialization  (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19)
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond20 1 European Commission (2020): AI Watch: Monitor the  development, uptake and impact of Artificial Intelligence  for Europein: https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/ ai-watchen [2 Nov. 2020].  2 India, Russia, Israel, Japan, South Korea, UAE, Canada and  Singapore. 3 Even though no indicator of these regions was present in  the data. 4 India is likely to overtake China in the next decades as  its population is expected to surpass China’s by 2026. In  comparison, the US is home to 292 million internet users.  5 Dr. Holger Schmidt (2020): Plattform Ökonomie. Dr. Holger  Schmidt Netzökonom in: https://www.netzoekonom.de/ plattform-oekonomie/  [2 Nov 2020].  6 International Federation of Robotics (2019): Executive  Summary of World Robotics 2019 Industrial Robots.  Available: https://ifr.org/downloads/press2018/ Executive%20Summary%20WR%202019%20Industrial%20 Robots.pdf [2 Nov 2020].  7 Gantz, Reinsel, Rydning (2019): The US Datasphere:  Consumers flocking to cloud. International Data  Corporationin Available: https://www.seagate.com/files/ www-content/our-story/trends/files/data-age-us-idc.pdf [2   Nov 2020].   8 Reinsel, Venkatraman, Gantz, Rydning (2019): The EMEA  Datasphere: Rapid growth and migration to the edge.  International Data Corporation In: https://www.seagate. com/files/www-content/our-story/trends/files/data-ageemea-idc.pdf [2  nOv 2020].   9 Heikkilä (2020): The Achilles’ heel of Europe’s AI strategy,  in https://www.politico.eu/article/europe-ai-strategyweakness/ [2 Nov 2020]. 10 Balser (2020): Schatz aus dem Netz. Süddeutsche  Zeitung, in: https://www.sueddeutsche.de/politik/digitalegesellschaft-schatz-aus-dem-netz-1.4769008 [2  Nov 2020]. 11 Schwab (2019): The global competitiveness report. World  Economic Forum, in:  http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_ TheGlobalCompetitivenessReport2019.pdf [2  Nov 2020]. 12 On average we find 27 AI professionals per 1 million  inhabitants in the EU as per an analysis of LinkedIn data, a  number that again varies across the region. Luxembourg  is leading in this metric with 115.6 AI professionals per  1 million inhabitants, followed by Finland and Ireland with  59.5 and 59.4 respectively. Bulgaria, Malta and Poland,  on the other hand, are lagging behind with 4.3, 4.6 and  6.1 AI professionals per 1 million inhabitants respectively.  For comparison, at a global level, Singapore, the UK, US,  and Canada are home to 103.7, 50.6, 47.8 and 39.9 AI  professionals based on the same data set. 13 Of the remaining 29%, 3% go to work in Canada, 6% in the  UK and 20% are not employed yet, currently finishing their  graduate programs. 14 Macro Polo (2020): The global AI talent tracker, in:  https:// macropolo.org/digital-projects/the-global-ai-talent-tracker/   [2 Nov 2020]. 15 Hartocollis (2020): 17 states sue to block visa student  rules. The New York Times, in https://www.nytimes. com/2020/07/13/us/f1-student-visas-trump.html  [2 Nov 2020].16 Groth (2017): Sorry, congress: the tax bill won’t create the  jobs of the future. Wired in: https://www.wired.com/story/ sorry-congress-the-tax-bill-wont-create-the-jobs-of-thefuture/  [2 Nov 2020]. 17 Hao (2020): A new $12 billion US chip plant sounds like  a win for Trump. Not quite. MIT Technology Review, in:  https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/19/1001902/ tsmc-chip-plant-and-huawei-export-ban-not-trump-win/   [2 Nov 2020]  18 Ott (2018): European chip industry aims to get back on  the map. Handelsblatt, in: https://www.handelsblatt. com/english/companies/semiconductors-european-chipindustry-aims-to-get-back-on-the-map/23582014.html  [2 Nov 2020].  19 The Economist (2018): Chip wars: China, America and  silicon supremacy, in: https://www.economist.com/ leaders/2018/12/01/chip-wars-china-america-and-siliconsupremacy [2  Nov 2020].  20 ECSEL Joint Undertaking (2020): Lighthouse initiatives, in:  https://www.ecsel.eu/lighthouse-initiatives  [2 Nov 2020]. 21 European Processor Initiative (2020): EPI, in https://www. european-processor-initiative.eu/project/epi/  [2 Nov 2020].  22 Deep learning or convolutional neural networks is an  approach based on layers of artificial neural networks that  detect increasingly granular patterns of detail and attach  corresponding labels. It is most commonly used in image  recognition and supervised learning. 23 Miethke, Rothe, Binninger (2017): Bosch baut Chip-Werk  in Dresden. SächsischeSZ, in: https://www.saechsische. de/bosch-baut-chip-werk-in-dresden-3705198.html  [2 Nov 2020]. 24 Across the EU, member states are home to 7.5 AI  researchers on average compared to Singapore (59.2),  Switzerland (33.7), US (31.3), Israel (30), UK (22) and Canada  (21.9). Within the EU, Malta (34.6), Denmark (21.6), Finland  (19.8) and Sweden (18.4) are leading. In terms of total  numbers of AI researchers, Germany is topping the list,  given the UK has left the EU.  25 General Secretariat of the Council (2020): Special meeting  of the European Council (17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 July  2020). Page 5, 18, 20. European Council, in: https://www. consilium.europa.eu/media/45109/210720-euco-finalconclusions-en.pdf [2  Nov 2020].  26 For example, the IoT, advanced analytics and artificial  intelligence, augmented virtual reality and wearables,  advanced robotics, and 3D printing.  27 US (100), Israel (95), Japan (79), UAE (77) Singapore (76),  Canada (65), India (61), China (56) and South Korea (56).  28 Average answer to the question: In your country, to what  extent do companies invest in emerging technologies  (e. g. Internet of Things, advanced analytics and artificial  intelligence, augmented virtual reality and wearables,  advanced robotics, 3D printing)? [1 = not at all; 7 = to  a great extent] | 2017–18 weighted average. Source:  Schwab (2017): Executive Opinion Survey 2017: The global  competitiveness report 2017-2018. World Economic  Forum, in: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GCR2017-2018/ eos2017_questionnaire.pdf [2  Nov 2020].
1. Current state of AI in the EU and beyond21 29 Mazzucato (2013): Government-investor, risk-taker,  innovator. TED, in: https://www.ted.com/talks/mariana_ mazzucato_government_investor_risk_taker_innovator/ discussion [2  Nov 2020]. 30 McKinsey & Company (2018): Government 4.0 – the public  sector in the digital age, in: https://www.mckinsey.de/ publikationen/leading-in-a-disruptive-world/government40-the-public-sector-in-the-digital-age [2  Nov 2020]. OECD  (2017): Government at a glance 2017. OECD Publishing, in:  https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/gov_glance-2017enpdf?expires=1600781962&id=id&accname=guest&checks um=9339163D5F129BD544B854D8DF0C749D  [2 Nov 2020].  31 McKinsey & Company (2018): Government 4.0 – the public  sector in the digital age, in: https://www.mckinsey.de/ publikationen/leading-in-a-disruptive-world/government40-the-public-sector-in-the-digital-age [2  Nov 2020].  32 Barbaschow (2018): e-Estonia: What is all the fuss about?  ZDNet, in: https://www.zdnet.com/article/e-estonia-what-isall-the-fuss-about/  [2 Nov 2020]. 
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy22 states are in the process of finalizing and publish ing their strategies.  All national AI strategies agree to some extent  on the geopolitical importance of AI,34 but they  diverge on whether to approach AI in a holistic  manner or to focus on specific sectors. Of the  existing AI strategies and drafts, ten are more  refined, avoiding approaches that would spread  state efforts too thinly, and explicitly identifying or  highlighting priority sectors in which AI should be  fostered. The healthcare sector receives the most  attention,35 followed by transportation and ener gy,36 agriculture and public administration,37 and  industry and manufacturing.38 However, it should  be noted that the EU is better equipped to tackle  some areas than individual governments. While  transportation, energy, agriculture and mobility  are key areas for the EU administration, health care and public administration are very much  country specific and therefore require national  rather than EU approaches. Defense and security  on the other hand only appear in the French AI  strategy. The French Ministry of Defense under lined the importance of AI for the military in early  2018, when it announced plans to invest €100 2. Summary of the EU’s AI strategy The US and China lead the global “AI race,” but  other countries have started to promote AI as a  national priority. While some countries in Europe,  such as the UK, France and Germany have a  foundation in place to build AI capabilities for the  economy and society, the EU as a whole faces the  imminent risk of falling behind due to the weak AI  ecosystems in many member states. Some influ ential voices see no hope at all for the continent’s  AI sector.33 Against this background, and building  on strategic initiatives by EU member states, the  European Commission under the new President  von der Leyen declared AI a priority and released a  range of policies designed to make “Europe fit for  the Digital Age.” This chapter provides an overview  of the national AI strategies and EU policy docu ments, before concluding with an assessment of  the EU’s strategic options for global AI competition.  2.1 Similarities and differences of  national AI strategies in the EU As of February 2020, 15 EU member states (includ ing the UK) had followed the call of the EU and  published a national AI strategy. All other member  
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy23 Malta and the Netherlands, among others. In the  hope of increasing permeability between research  and the private and public sectors, the idea of  “innovation vouchers’’ has found its way into a  number of different strategies, putting a focus on  small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and  startups – the latter with a view to market access  and capital. While many strategies reflect a com mitment to open data, there is a range of ideas on  data-sharing agreements for data exchanges, data  markets, data trusts, and measures to increase  the interoperability or API standards – with  some countries yet to take a view. For example,  Latvia plans to conduct a survey of practition ers to understand data needs. The Dutch strat egy foresees the compilation of an inventory of  data-sharing mechanisms. However, virtually all  the national strategies lack sufficient considera tion of critical computing infrastructure needs,  which are either neglected or limited only to ref erences to EU initiatives (e. g. the €1bn European  High-Performance Computing Joint Undertak ing, Euro HPC41, and the European Open Science  Cloud42). Some versions note national supercom puter initiatives (e. g. the Spanish Super Comput ing Network of 13 supercomputers, France’s plans  to invest €115 million in a new supercomputer, or  the €18 million supercomputer developed at SURF  in the Netherlands). Others focus on improving  5G coverage – another computing-related issue  that made the headlines in 2019, as it unveiled the  dependency of Europe and even the US on tech nology components from China. million per year in AI research.39 Although sev eral European projects are developing AI-ena bled defense technologies, Europe’s political and  strategic debate on AI-enabled military technology  is underdeveloped. This leaves the EU at a stra tegic disadvantage, considering that the debate  about the ways in which AI might change warfare  and military organization is at an all-time high in  the US and China.40 Given reports of significantly  increased AI investments by those governments,  we can expect these dynamics to remain in place  for the foreseeable future.  Looking more at the detail, the existing strate gies and drafts, these details tend to focus on two  of the three requisite pillars – talent, data, and  computing infrastructure – and how they sup port the development and deployment of AI on a  national scale. While most plans tend to promote  talent development and encourage open access  to data, they generally fall short in support for  much-needed advances in computing infrastruc ture. Current versions seek to promote a digital  society by enhancing student and professional  training, providing models for data sharing, fos tering research, increasing permeability between  research and companies, supporting commer cialization through the private and public sector,  and providing a conducive yet human-centered  governance and regulatory framework. Various  forms of massive open online courses (MOOC),  as piloted in Finland (“Elements of AI”), have been  adopted in Belgium, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,  ZOOM OUT – Brexit: Strong implications   for flows of data and talent In many regards the UK provides a more attractive environment for AI talent, R&D and  commercialization than any of the EU member states. Since 1996, AI-related research  publications from the UK have exerted greater influence on the field than work from any  other EU member state. Of the USD 302 billion in venture investments to AI startups in  the EU and the UK between Q1 2016 and Q1 2020, companies located in the UK’s startup  hubs received USD 120.5 billion. Beyond startup funding, the UK has produced the most  successful startups, further cementing its draw for AI development and talent. Among  London’s big names in AI are companies like the USD 600 million-backed Improbable;  recently minted unicorn BenevolentAI; Ocado, arguably the most advanced logistics AI  firm after Amazon; and the Alphabet-owned algorithm-builder DeepMind, which might  employ the world’s strongest AI team.
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy24 Cooperation” signed by EU member states, Nor way and Switzerland in 2018, the European Com mission issued a communication that contains  reflections on the geopolitical importance of AI for  Europe’s future, as well as Europe’s mixed compet itive position within the global AI landscape.45   The White Paper on AI aims to foster the uptake of  AI technologies, underpinned by what it calls “an  ecosystem of excellence” that is aligned to Euro pean ethical norms, legal requirements, and social  values (for example an “ecosystem of trust”). Thus,  in contrast to the US and Chinese AI strategies,  the EU – in light of its aim to foster “human-cen tered AI” – pays significant attention to human  rights and human and societal welfare, calling for  global and European cooperation and a collective  commitment to an inclusive, multi-stakeholder  deliberation. In this regard, the White Paper is a  particularly sensible and clear step on from where  the debate started a few years ago.46 However, at  the same time, more needs to be done at both a  policy and an implementation level. For example,  the White Paper’s definition of AI as “a collection  of technologies that combine data, algorithms  and computing power” needs to be sharpened to  include non-data-driven AI and the surrounding  socio-technological systems. Also, several experts  have questioned the risk classifications of AI sys tems, noting that the White Paper’s current use of  only high- and low-risk systems is insufficiently dif ferentiated, lacking nuance. Deliberations regard ing the balance between promoting the opportuni ties of AI and regulating its possible dangers were  also the reason why the German government Recommendation 6 – Establish UK-EU special   science and innovation zones. The UK is home  to some of the most crucial AI research labs,  access to which is critical for the EU to advance AI.  The EU on the other hand offers research part nerships and some of the most relevant research  funding schemes (e. g. EU Horizon 2020), access to  which provides a vital funding stream for ongoing  academic and research efforts in the UK. Despite  the EU’s stance on trade and the likely “hard”  Brexit at the end of 2020, science and innova tion has not been a controversial subject in the  negotiations between the two sides, providing the  basis for a special science and innovation zone  that would allow collaboration between research  labs and startups without legal, institutional or  political barriers to the flow of ideas, talent, and  investment capital. Those zones should embrace  the linkages between the R&D and startup hubs in  Oxford, Cambridge and London on one side, and  Helsinki, Copenhagen, Berlin, Munich, Hamburg,  Paris, etc. on the other, so as to ease the commer cialization of R&D. The European Digital Innova tion Hub initiative43 and the FinTech-focused Euro pean Forum for Innovation Facilitators44 could  serve as building blocks for such zones.   2.2 An evolving human-centered  EU AI policy framework Amidst concerns that Europe is losing ground, in  October 2017 the European Council asked the  European Commission to develop a European  approach to AI. Building on the “Declaration of With regard to talent, many of Europe’s brightest minds go to the UK for education and  employment – an important factor considering the EU’s need to fill talent gaps on the  continent. In 2017, there were approximately 496,000 unfilled positions in the field of big  data and analytics in the EU27. This is set to change. As of June 2020, the UK announced  that EU citizens will no longer qualify for home status fees and student loans, meaning a  possible 60 percent decrease in the number of EU students in the UK. In addition, part nerships defining the rules that govern AI are less likely to move forward. In a speech  in summer 2018 at the International Federation for European Law, the EU’s chief Brexit  negotiator Michel Barnier rejected the notion of anything other than a so-called “ade quacy decision” with the UK after its exit. An adequacy decision is an EU mechanism that  enables citizens’ personal data to flow more easily to third countries, which is how the UK  is classified after Brexit.
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy25 uncertainty for companies that deal with data,  especially new market entrants, and many compa nies opt to train their AI systems in other coun tries owing to concerns about violating the GDPR  requirements.51 While large technology compa nies have the resources to ensure compliance, the  costs associated with the GDPR have effectively  created a barrier to market entry for smaller digital  innovators, consolidating the power of established  companies, rather than leveling the playing field.  This is a clear warning sign that should prompt a  review of the GDPR and the rapid promotion of a  uniform, comprehensible legal framework for the  handling, transport, storage, and processing of  data (whether personal or industrial) – an essential  element if Europe seeks to progress its own data  economy model. To address the governance of AI beyond data pro tection, the EU established a High-Level Expert  Group on AI (HLEG-AI) to develop Ethics Guidelines  based on the EU’s Charter of Fundamental Rights.  The Guidelines define “trustworthy AI” applications  along three axes: lawfulness, ethics, and robust ness. To make the concept more practical, the  HLEG-AI translated these components into a set  of six requirements that AI systems must satisfy in  order to be considered trustworthy:  1. protect human agency and ensure human  oversight of their operation and impact;  2. be technically and environmentally robust and  safe to use;  3. respect individual privacy and be based on  good governance;  4. ensure they are non-discriminatory and fair;  5. protect societal and environmental wellbeing;   6. and be transparent and accountable.  The results of the expert group have received  global attention. The public consultation on the  Ethics Guidelines on Trustworthy AI resulted in  562 pages of feedback, not only from EU-based  national and international companies and organi zations but from across the globe,52 underscoring  the EU’s convening power and its ability to set AI  benchmarks in the fields of regulation and gov ernance. However, as indicated above, there is  also a growing sense that, rather than introduce  a generic AI regulation, the EU will need to adopt  a more nuanced risk approach, possibly one that submitted its feedback in June 2020, long after the  official deadline. To translate the policy into con crete AI applications and research breakthroughs,  the foreseen budget of €6.8 billion for 2021–2027  for Digital Europe, a capacity-building program  for AI, supercomputing, and cybersecurity might  not be sufficient, considering the cuts to the EU  research program Horizon.  Highlighting the importance of data, the European  Commission, in conjunction with the White Paper  on AI, released the European Data Strategy that  plugs into the European Digital Market Strategy and  seeks to free up the flow of non-personal data to  complement the EU’s focus on personal data pro tections. This shall be achieved by creating a single  market around “Common European” data spaces,  which would ensure that data becomes available in  a responsible and safeguarded manner. Although the EU’s GDPR has succeeded in setting  a global standard for data protection, its enforce ment and its impact on the digital economy  remain a work in progress. Its protection mandate  is not sufficiently verticalized to accommodate the  experimentation and application design in certain  societal or economic sectors, which means its pro tections are not yet projected out into the market  through commercially scalable and privacy-as sured data business models. In 2019, the Data  Protection Commission of Ireland, where many  multinational tech companies have their EU head quarters, received 7,215 complaints, an increase of  75 percent on 2018 (4,113) and up from just 2,642  in 2017, the year before GPDR was introduced.47  Across the EU’s 27 member states, around 300,000  complaints have been filed.48 However, since 2018,  European watchdogs have only levied around  €150 million in fines under the regulation, lead ing Commissioner Vestager to conclude that tech  companies perceive the fines as a mere cost of  business, rather than them triggering a re-think  and providing a redistribution measure to back  public funding of AI R&D.49 While the GDPR has  empowered internet users on paper, its imple mentation has degraded the user experience of  many digital services, with few practical means for  users to understand and navigate through legal  language and few suitable technical solutions.50  Furthermore, it has created a high degree of legal 
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy26 emerged. The European Union Aviation Safety  Agency (EASA) established a task force on AI in  October 2018 and has now published its “Artificial  Intelligence Roadmap: A human-centric approach  to AI in aviation.” This sets out a roadmap to  autonomous flights and surveys the extensive reg ulatory changes that are necessary to ensure the  responsible and safe use of AI.54     DRILL DOWN: The importance of the Digital Service Act (DSA)  The Digital Service Act (DSA), a revision of the eCommerce Directive that has governed  online services in the EU since 2000, is likely to become the most ambitious and contro versial policy initiative under the umbrella of EU’s digital market initiatives, despite having  not yet been formally introduced. The Act’s core goal is to update pan-EU liability rules  for internet platforms, addressing thorny issues such as fake news and illegal content.  While the DSA is expected to set the global benchmark for platform regulation, as the  GDPR did for data protection, it is likely there will be a lengthy process to reach an agree ment, possibly lasting up to five years.  Closely interlinked with the DSA are considerations regarding antitrust regulation reform,  an issue that has risen to the top of many agendas in the US Congress as well. In their  current form, antitrust regulations still focus on consumer price increases, which are  not the driving factor in the digital economy. Technology platform models are based on  an exchange of user data for “free services,” rather than making their profits from users  directly. Combined with the network effects amassed through huge user bases, platform  companies, especially in the social media space, have started to monopolize information  and attention in addition to market power, increasing the access barriers for new market  entrants. In the era of data science, concerns about the diversity of opinions – long the  territory of media regulators – become questions of economic and political power. This  transformation, combined with antiquated laws, have prompted calls for a review of anti trust regulation as it applies to new models in the data economy. Proponents of antitrust  reform, however, have to defend themselves against promoting protectionism. is technology-, application- or industry-specific.  Application-specific regulation, for example, could  refer to the regulation of facial recognition tech nology – there was speculation that the EU would  impose a three- to five-year moratorium on this  application but this has not been the case.53 Cases  of industry-specific AI regulation based on the  Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI have already  Recommendation 7 – Seek Indo-Pacific   partnerships for governance of AI and the   digital economy at large: As a global leader in  digital regulation, the EU can take even greater  initiative at the government level to protect the  liberal world order in the cognitive age. With the  US government in retreat globally, the EU needs  to seek partnerships to formulate AI standards  (e. g. around thorny issues such as facial recogni tion technology); build audit mechanisms for dig ital infrastructure (e. g. 5G); and promote greater resource sharing (e. g. with regard to data). These  partnerships should begin with India, Australia,  Japan, and South Korea – China’s neighboring  democracies are current frontliners in defend ing liberal norms and institutions in the power  play between the West and China. In the long run,  these partnerships should increasingly reach out  to the next three billion users in other countries  in the Global South, in particular Africa – Europe’s  neighbor and a growing digital market. While the  Eastern European countries have played a sub -
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy27 ordinate role in the development and commer cialization of AI, they could serve a bridgehead  function in this new partnership, especially if it  extends to the Global South. Member states in  Eastern Europe bring crucial experience in having  to make difficult decisions – between economic  models (leverage a cheap manufacturing center or  transition toward a knowledge-based economy) as  well as political models (follow liberal or author itarian approaches). Hence, they can moderate  the EU side of such partnerships, especially with  emerging powers like India, many of which are  grappling with similarly complex questions. Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20) Recommendation 8 – Promote and enforce  user-centric data protection: Despite increas ingly sophisticated regulations for the digital  economy and data protection, the implementa tion of these rules often leads to poor user expe riences and clunky enforcement, as the GPDR  demonstrates. Rather than adding to the regula tory framework, improving outcomes will rely on  designing standards that enhance usability and  creating enforcement structures that make pri vacy infringements more than just a “cost of doing  business”. Efforts to improve the design of data  protection could come in the form of incentives  for more user-friendly legal language or support  for technical solutions that centralize privacy  management in user specific privacy charters.  As of now, users must manage privacy and data  settings across dozens of websites and digital ser vices. Meanwhile, improving enforcement of exist ing privacy regulations requires a pan-European  regulator, rather than national and sub-national  authorities. Institutional foundations already exist  for a pan-European regulatory body, and a path  has already been chartered with the G29 Network  (network of Data Protection Authorities) and the  European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS). This  will not only improve coordination and enforce ment, but also strengthen the EU’s voice in digital  regulatory matters on a global stage – as of April  2020, 132 countries had data protection regula tions in place.55   Recommendations on Governance  (R1), (R8), (R13), (R18)2.3 The EU and the global AI competition  Until the EU’s AI policies unfold and empower  member states to build independent AI capabil ities, European countries must ask themselves  whether the “third way” model can truly stand on  its own or if they must align with a US or Chinese  model. Protection and regulation cannot survive  without economic projection, so a passive “cir cling of the wagons” will not generate sufficient  economic or societal value to create the kind of  growth that Europe’s economies need to remain  vibrant in the cognitive era. Despite their signif icant differences in approach, Europe needs to  keep the US as its closest and most trusted part ner. Due to the increasing penetration of AI in all  social and economic areas, the future is not only  determined by the actors with AI capabilities, but  also by the values of the creators of algorithms  and increasingly intelligent machines. Even if the  two partners disagree strongly from time to time,  nowhere else in the world have two powers as  influential as Europe and the US placed equal  emphasis on respect for individual freedoms and  the transparent rule of law – even if President  Trump does his best to undermine it, and Presi dent Xi and President Putin do their best to sepa rate the m. In their turbulent history, US institutions have  shown remarkable resilience in terms of transpar ent rule of law, civil liberties, personal choice, and  representation and democracy. While the cur rent US government pays lip service to AI ethics,  American companies, industry groups, civil society  organizations and scientific communities are driv ing the national and international discourse on  AI and ethics, as evidenced by the thoughtful and  comprehensive feedback that American actors  provided to the consultation on the EU Guidelines  on Trustworthy AI and the White Paper on AI (see  above). The system of transatlantic institutions  and partnerships between academia and busi ness provides a further basis for trustful cooper ation – something that will not be easily replaced  by China. Despite recent tensions and challenges,  research cooperation between the US and Europe  has grown steadily since 2003. There is a wealth  of framework conditions that guide responsible  technology development and deployment, such 
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy28 Recommendation 9 – Establish a Sequential  Bridging Model with the US:  Despite political  differences, it is imperative that both sides of the  Atlantic embrace a deeper partnership – with  Germany, the US federal government, and the US  state governments (especially California) leading.  This is rooted in our shared values of commu nity, our democratic legacy, and our enlighten ment heritage. We call this a Sequential Bridging  Model (SBM),56 a network of networks around  research and commercialization of AI that would  grow to include other Western countries, such  as Australia, Canada, South Korea or Japan – and  eventually serve as a platform for cooperation  with China. While generally being open to the  large and established tech companies, this SBM  would bring together a wide range of small and  medium-sized advanced, AI-based platforms to  empower local businesses with complementary  assets in consumer and enterprise data, IoT infra structure, automation and manufacturing. Such  a network could deal more effectively with anti trust concerns and establish guardrails for data  sharing (see Chapter 3.1 Recasting the data econ omy). American and European academic institu tions should serve as cornerstones for this model  because they align and complement in ways that  promise significant, mutually beneficial advances.  Both sides of this transatlantic partnership are  already seeking ways to enhance these academic  ties, including in ongoing discussions under the  umbrella of the EU’s multibillion-dollar research  program Horizon 2020.57  Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20)as the GDPR, which finds a parallel in the Califor nian Consumer Protection Act (CCPA). All of this  is welcomed by the majority of the 727 million  internet users on both sides of the Atlantic. Over  535 million of them are concerned about the pos sible misuse of data by internet companies. This  combined number is too large to be ignored by  Chinese internet companies looking for global  markets, especially since digital power emerges  from the scaling of offers and news.  Despite the current rhetoric, these shared values  have persisted for most of post-war history in  terms of free trade and economic relations. Trade  between the US and the EU in 2018, two years  after the rise of President Trump, was still larger  (USD 1.3 trillion) than US or European trade with  China (around USD 737 billion and USD 670 billion  respectively). Such considerable economic rela tions will only benefit from an AI-induced upgrade.  It should not be underestimated, for example, that  the American success story of “two steps forward,  one step back” is beginning to shift and adapt to  some of the more EU-centric concerns around  data security and data protection. US companies  are usually quick to bring new, often immature  products to market, and then learn and correct  “on the fly”. This dynamic lies at the heart of US  innovation. Following a series of scandals involv ing almost all major American technology compa nies, new regulations and an increasingly skepti cal user base are prompting digital companies to  revise their approaches and pay more attention to  privacy and stakeholder governance. While China  has gained advantages in the field of AI applica tions by virtue of its massive consumer market,  applied research and a powerful AI innovation  ecosystem, the US still holds the best position  from which to bring about the next generation of  scientific breakthroughs. The US and the EU must  therefore continue to work together if they are  to preserve democracy in a global system that  is increasingly challenged by less representative  systems – especially since new technologies can  either support or undermine democratic values.
2. Summary of the EU’s AI Strategy29 48 Manancourt and Scott (2020): Two years into new EU  privacy regime, questions hang over enforcement, in:  https://www-politico-eu.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www. politico.eu/article/europe-data-protection-privacy-gdpranniversary/amp/ [2 Nov 2020]. 49 Manancourt and Scott (2020): Two years into new EU  privacy regime, questions hang over enforcement, in  https://www-politico-eu.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www. politico.eu/article/europe-data-protection-privacy-gdpranniversary/amp/ [2 Nov 2020]. 50 European Commission (2020): Communication from the  Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,  the European Economic and Social Committee and the  Committee of the Regions. Page 10, in: https://ec.europa. eu/info/sites/info/files/communication-european-strategydata-19feb2020_en.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 51 One example of these uncertainties concerns the  separation of personal data. In many cases, personal data  is mixed with machine and/or industrial data, making it  difficult or virtually impossible to separate out the personal  data covered by the GDPR. 52 Including from the World Privacy Forum, International  Trademark Association, UNICEF, US based OpenAI, AI  Now Institute, Electronic Privacy Center, Intel, Visa and  Johnson & Johnson, Japan’s Cabinet Office and RikenAIP,  New Zealand‘s University of Otago, Hong Kong’s Privacy  Commission for Personal Data, Zimbabwe’s Standard  Association, and China’s tech giant Huawei. Source:  European Commission (2020): Stakeholder consultation on  guidelines’ first draft, in: https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai/stakeholder-consultationguidelines-first-draft [2 Nov 2020].  53 Chen (2020): The EU just released weakened guidelines for  regulating artificial intelligence. MIT Technology Review, in:  https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/02/19/876455/ european-union-artificial-intelligence-regulation-facialrecognition-privacy/ [2 Nov 2020].  54 European Union Aviation Safety Agency (2020): Artificial  intelligence roadmap: A human-centric approach to AI in  aviation, in: https://www.easa.europa.eu/sites/default/files/ dfu/EASA-AI-Roadmap-v1.0.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 55 The UN Conference on Trade and Development (2020):  Data protection and privacy legislation worldwide, in:  https://unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4DLegislation/eCom-Data-Protection-Laws.aspx [2 Nov 2020]. 56 A similar model was proposed by the authors of this study  (Cambrian) and the organizers of the Transatlantic Sync  Conference in November 2019, the first AI conference  between Silicon Valley and Germany. Source: Transatlantic  Sync (2020): Germany and Silicon Valley: Shaping a shared  digital future, in: https://www.transatlantic-sync.com/  [2 Nov 2020]. 57 European Commission (2019): Horizon Europe. The  next EU research & innovation investment programme  (2021 –2027), in: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/ research_and_innovation/strategy_on_research_and_ innovation/presentations/horizon_europe_en_investing_to_ shape_our_future.pdf [2 Nov 2020].33 Minsky (2018): One former google exec says there’s no  hope for Europe’s artificial intelligence sector. Sifted, in:  https://sifted.eu/articles/interview-google-kaifu-lee-aiartificial-intelligence/  [2 Nov 2020].  34 In particular, France’s AI strategy and the EU’s White Paper  on AI embrace AI as a geopolitical issue. 35 Appearing as priority sector in eight strategies: Healthcare:  Denmark, France, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,  and Spain. 36 Appearing each as priority sectors in seven strategies:  Transportation: Denmark, France, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,  Poland, and Portugal; Energy: Denmark, Hungary, Italy. 37 Appearing each as priority sectors in five strategies. 38 Appearing as priority sectors in four strategies. 39 Bauer (2018): La défense va consacrer 100 millions par an à  l’intelligence artificielle. LesEchos, in: https://www.lesechos. fr/2018/03/la-defense-va-consacrer-100-millions-par-an-alintelligence-artificielle-969508 [2  Nov 2020].  40 Brooks (2018): Technology and future war will test US  civil-military relations. War on the rocks, in: https:// warontherocks.com/2018/11/technology-and-future-warwill-test-u-s-civil-military-relations/  [2 Nov 2020].  Kania (2019): Learning without fighting: new developments  in PLA artificial intelligence war-gaming. Centre for a New  American Security, in: https://www.cnas.org/publications/ commentary/learning-without-fighting-new-developmentsin-pla-artificial-intelligence-war-gaming [2  Nov 2020].  41 EuroHPC (2020): EuroHPC: Leading the way in European  Supercomputing, in: https://eurohpc-ju.europa.eu/   [2 Nov 2020].  42 European Commission (2020): European Open Science  Cloud (EOSC), in: https://ec.europa.eu/research/ openscience/index.cfm?pg=open-science-cloud   [2 Nov 2020]. 43 AI DIH network (2020): Project in: https://ai-dih-network.eu/ project.html [2  Nov 2020].  44 Groth and Straube (2020): Analysis of current global AI  developments with a focus on Europe, in: https://www. kas.de/de/veranstaltungsberichte/detail/-/content/ deutschland-muss-sich-ranhalten-1 [2  Nov 2020].  45 The communiqué  called for a “Coordinated Plan on the  Development and Use of AI made in Europe,” and was  complemented by a White Paper on Artificial Intelligence ,  entitled “a European approach to excellence and trust”,  the “ European strategy for data ” and a digital strategy  document  entitled “Shaping Europe’s Digital Future.” This  set of policy documents is embedded in one of six priority  areas for 2019-2024 of the von der Leyen Commission,  called “Europe‘s fitness for the Digital Age”, promoting  “An Economy that Works for People”, and protecting the  European way of life, a stronger Europe in the world, and  a new push for European democracy where innovation  occurs “within safe and ethical boundaries”. 46 Cambrian, through the UC Berkeley ecosystem, provided  extensive comments to the White Paper.  47 An Coimisiún um Chosaint Sonrai (2020): Data protection  commission publishes 2019 annual report, in: https:// www.dataprotection.ie/en/news-media/latest-news/dataprotection-commission-publishes-2019-annual-report   [2 Nov 2020]. 
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership30 expectations for this untapped market affirms its  strategic importance. The UN estimates that more  than half of global population growth between  now and 2050 will occur in Africa, reaching a  total of 2.5 billion people.59 India’s population is  expected to overtake China’s in 202660 and current  estimates suggest Nigeria will become the sec ond-largest country in the world behind India by  2100 – making these countries increasingly attrac tive for technology actors. As author and investor  Kai Fu Lee notes: “Whatever company wants to  lead in AI and wants to become the next Facebook  or Google needs to have a strategy to tap into the  markets of developing countries.”61 This potential has spurred increased atten tion and investments by entities from almost  every global power. The US is leveraging corpo rate-driven models to get to the next three billion  users, through projects such as SpaceX’s Starlink,  which has launched 60 new satellites to expand  the ever-growing broadband mega-constella tion.62 Moreover, since 2015, CEOs of major tech  companies such as Facebook and Twitter have 3. Evolving preconditions     for AI leadership Countries that seek to optimize the development,  deployment and use of AI systems must promote  the availability of and access to data and comput ing power, and they must regulate to safeguard  against the irresponsible use of the powerful AI  technologies that researchers, businesses and indi vidual developers create. In this chapter, we will  shed light on some of the key trends influencing  these factors– the expansion of the digital econ omy, data, computing power and AI governance.  3.1 Expanding the digital economy –   the race for the next 3bn internet   users  Despite major technological advances, only  59 percent of the global population actively used  the internet as of April 2020, resulting in a poten tial pool of 3.1 billion people that digital compa nies can reach as they come online.58 These future  internet users live mainly in the Global South.  Despite a lower average purchasing power par ity (PPP) per capita, the sheer size of and growth  
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership31 cles. Of the 22,000 PhD-educated Indians in AI  fields around the world, only 1.7 percent have  returned to India.69 While a study suggests that AI  has the potential to add almost USD 1 trillion to  India’s economy in 2035, the country will not real ize these gains without an overhaul of academia  and education, and ways to retain talent in the  country.70 Nonetheless, in terms of reaching the  unserved populations within the country, compa nies such as Reliance Jio, an Indian telco founded  in 2016, show how innovation can quickly bring  out the tremendous potential lurking in next-bil lion-user countries. Jio massively disrupted the  Indian telecom market, adding more than 200 mil lion subscribers in two years. Starting to realize its  unique position, India has also pursued a digital  form of import substitution, opting in July 2020 to  ban China’s WeChat, QQ and TikTok, the world’s  most valuable startup and short video content  platform. These moves could pioneer an inter national trend as talks about similar measures  emerge in the US.  Meanwhile, Europe remains a key partner for  many African, Latin American and Asian govern ments and export markets, having invested €31  billion between 2014–2020 into the African econ omy alone.71 Its emerging initiatives, such as the  European Digital Innovation Centers, have not  received the same publicity as other initiatives,  even though they are part of the European Com mission’s planned Digital Europe Programme,72  which looks to invest €9.2 billion in an effort to  align the EU budget 2021–2027 with increasing  digital challenges. European telecom companies,  such as Orange, invested heavily in fiberglass  cables, essentially providing the traditional hard ware to connect the next three billion users to the  internet. The EU also engages in digital diplomacy,  having recognized 13 countries globally as pro viding adequate levels of protection for personal  data (as of March 2020), and appointing a num ber of global ambassadors for the “digital world”,   notably in Germany and Denmark. Recommendation 10 – Establish Digital Econ omy Agreements (DEA) with Key Partners in  the Global South. Complementing its ongoing  efforts through digital diplomacy, the EU should  seek the establishment of DEAs with India, Nige -visited African nations in an effort to expand  their global reach and connect more users.63 This  attention by tech CEOs has also already translated  into concrete investments.64 Google opened its  first AI research lab in Africa in 2019, located in  Ghana’s capital Accra, joining the ranks of Google  AI research labs in Tokyo, Zurich, New York, and  Paris.65  China has sought to reach tomorrow’s internet  users through a public-private expansion strategy  called the “Digital Silk Road”.66 Since 2013, Beijing  has signed 173 arrangements with 125 countries  (including Italy, Switzerland, and Greece) and 29  worldwide associations, continuously adding to  its massive Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).67 China’s infrastructural wings have already spread to  Brazil and Cameroon in the form of submarine  optical cables, the backbone of the world’s inter net connectivity, carrying about 95 percent of all  worldwide traffic. Through its plans to connect  African, Asian and South American countries with  new cables, China aims to increase its control over  internet traffic and introduce a policy regime for a  new world order. In 2018, for instance, the stateowned China Construction Bank funded Huawei’s  construction of a sea cable that connects Kenya  to China through Pakistan.68 The same year, Ten cent, famous for its all-in-one app WeChat, signed  partnership agreements with Kenya’s biggest pay ment provider, Safaricom, to open up direct trad ing and exchange channels between the hitherto  disconnected countries. Going forward, Chinese  businesses and tourists will no longer have to  rely on a slow, expensive dollar-based transaction  infrastructure, effectively replacing the US-based  SWIFT transactions with Yen-denominated trans actions via Chinese sea cables.  Recognizing its own potential, India has sought  to position itself as the “Innovation Garage of  the Global South.” While it already has estab lished platforms for collaboration with Africa  (e. g. through a respective branch of the annual  CyFy conference), built a partnership on AI with  the UAE, and opened a branch of the World Eco nomic Forum’s (WEF) Fourth Industrial Revolution  Center in Mumbai, the nation’s global ambitions  have not yet materialized. One of India’s greatest  exports – talent – is also one of its biggest obsta -
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership32 allocation of data, we also see trust in the digi tal economy deteriorating. According to a 2018  Pew survey, only 31 percent of Americans aged  between 19 and 28 believed tech companies do  enough to protect their personal data. According  to a 2014 Pew Survey, 91 percent of Americans  “agree” or “strongly agree” that people have lost  control over their personal data and that privacy  has become a primary concern. About 45 percent  of internet users are more worried about their pri vacy now than a year ago, and 37 percent of inter net users in the US mentioned that companies  collecting and sharing personal data with other  companies is their top concern when it comes to  their digital life.75  The numbers in the EU are similar, prompting a  growing number of experts and organizations  to call for a new data-economy model. Indeed,  several national data and AI strategies seek to  address this issue (see Chapter 2.1). However, we  also see new private-sector approaches to data  privacy and data sharing emerging. One particu larly disruptive model revolves around the idea  of data marketplaces, which aims to make user  data tradeable while assuring and establishing a  value for individual data privacy. A trusted and  transparent marketplace would give data crea tors (i. e. everyday internet users) a new source of  income, and it would allow startups to make data  collection a mere cost item rather than a cumber some strategic exercise. End users could share or  trade data through the marketplaces in a series of  trade-offs between privacy and economic bene fits, essentially choosing the price at which they  are willing to share different types of personal  data. Such marketplace trade-offs are far more  difficult for companies, however, especially since  most established businesses associate data shar ing with compliance risks and a loss of competitive  advantage. Cracking this challenge and facilitat ing the collection of data from businesses to train  B2B AI-powered solutions has stoked discussions  in tech companies and governments alike. Micro soft, Adobe and German SAP, for example, have  partnered to form the Open Data Initiative, a busi ness initiative that offers AI-assisted data lakes to  client companies, which can access broader sets  of data to reap unrealized benefits from resources  they already had76. Amazon is leveraging its posi -ria and other countries in Africa and the Global  South. These treaties could establish digital trade  rules and digital economy collaborations between  two or more economies. In the case of Africa,  such DEAs could link with the recently launched  African Continental Free Trade Area. In India,  they could link with ongoing AI collaboration pro grams related to German development coop eration. Through DEAs with key partners in the  Global South, the EU can develop international  frameworks to foster interoperability of technol ogy standards and systems and support EU busi nesses, especially SMEs, engaging in digital trade  and electronic commerce.  Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20) 3.2 Recasting the data economy The digital economy is a major driver of Gross  Domestic Product (GDP), but concerns are rising  about the effects of digital technologies on privacy  and income distribution. Research suggests that  the allocation of data in today’s digital economy is  not optimal,73 as only a few large platforms have  access to meaningful data pools. According to  some estimates, 99.5 percent of the data we pro duce is inaccessibly locked in organizational, appli cation or industry silos.74 The lack of access to  data for non-digital platforms and smaller actors,  particularly in the private sector and civil soci ety, limits the ability of many people to participate  in digital value creation. The large digital plat forms that collect and hold data tend to overuse –  and even abuse – the data they have, establish ing themselves in oligopolistic market structures  driven by reinforcing network effects. A digital  platform’s success typically requires a large user  base to generate the volumes of user data needed  to train and develop services, which then attract  more users in a virtuous (or not so virtuous) cycle.  In most cases, only established platform compa nies have access to such significant user volumes,  which give them an edge over competitors in col lecting data and designing attractive services and  products. This limits new players from entering  and serving markets, but it also tends to isolate  data in ways that lead to one-dimensional use  cases and limited value. Aside from a suboptimal 
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership33 contemplate different ideas for fostering data  exchange between individuals and companies,  possibly building on a European cloud-infrastruc ture that is based on GAIA-X and the European  Cloud Initiative. Observing and learning from  these experiments will allow the EU to comple ment the idea of common data spaces81 with  market mechanisms that create incentives for  companies and individuals to share data in ways  that ensure privacy and trust. Encouraging further  experimentation with data sharing mechanisms  will also require the establishment of digital sand boxes that are overseen or coached by EU data  experts who can give companies the advice and  assurance that their data-driven innovations are  in line with relevant regulations. By spearhead ing the piloting and introduction of a new data  economy model – one that creates a more opti mal allocation of data value through innovative  data exchange mechanisms – the EU can solidify  its role as an advocate for a free market economy  and more balanced regulatory approaches for  breaking up the power of platform companies.   Recommendations on Commercialization   (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19) 3.3 Hardware innovations and the next  frontier of computing power  Despite the strategic importance of computing  power, the subject is often marginalized in conver sations about AI promotion. However, a number  of simultaneous trends will likely shape – if not  disrupt – current computer technologies, includ ing cloud computing and advanced chip design.  Driven continuous evolution in efficiency and  effectiveness in the semiconductor industry, we  increasingly see a shift in paradigms from pro cessing data and algorithms through the cloud to  processing directly on end devices – a phenome non dubbed “edge computing”.82 This has become  possible in a wider variety of use cases because  semiconductor companies have squeezed more  power into smaller chips – and thus more power  into common industry or consumer devices. Appli cation areas for edge computing can mainly be  found in the industrial space (e. g. transport and  logistics), smart homes, healthcare, and smart city  applications (e. g. traffic management or pub -tion as the world’s largest cloud provider by facili tating data exchanges between organizations and  with individuals.77 Most recently, companies in the  EU – primarily 11 German and 11 French firms, as  of June 2020 – joined forces to build GAIA-X78. This  European cloud storage network creates a new  gold standard for the industry, strengthens Euro pean data sovereignty, and builds the infrastruc ture for a collective European data market.  However, data marketplaces are not the only pro posal put forward to establish a better allocation  of data and spur growth in the digital economy.  Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide  Web, is creating a new data infrastructure called  Solid. In his model, platforms don’t actually host  all of the data, but serve as mere registries that  interconnect individually stored (and still person ally owned) consumer data. One key advantage  is the prevention of vendor lock-in, which shifts  negotiation power to the individual rather than  the platform.79 However, giving individuals power  over their individual data doesn’t mean they will  use it. End users might refrain from exerting their  ownership rights, feeling it is a hassle or not see ing enough economic potential to make the effort  worthwhile. The UK Research and Innovations  (UKRI) funds have backed a similar approach,  but one that adds some third-party facilitation.  The application, called Databox, proposes tech nical and legal solutions to data sharing, rather  than the pure architectural innovation suggested  by Berners-Lee. Databox users would contribute  to a sort of consumer data trust, which aggre gates consumer information on an independent  platform, allowing for a secure and conscious  supply of consumer data and redistributing the  power between end-users and platforms.80 Currently, platforms host the data, leaving consumers  entirely out of the loop. Marketplaces and models  like Solid and Databox keep data hosting under  the control of the individual or an independent  party, making platforms dependent and, thus,  ready to negotiate. Recommendation 11 – Foster experimenta tion with data marketplaces. The need for a  new data economy model is imperative for digital  business and human growth. In their national AI  strategies (see Chapter 2.1), EU member states 
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership34 ZOOM OUT – AI in cybersecurity, a double-edged sword The more AI is directly deployed and actively advises or makes decisions, the more  it will become the target of cybersecurity attacks, making reliable security crucial. Attacks  can take the form of direct manipulation of the engines themselves or the feeding of  misleading data to generate malicious patterns. Cybercriminal activity, in general, has  increased by 67 percent over the last five years, with an average cost to each surveilled  company of USD 13 million in 2018, an increase of 12 percent on the previous year,  according to Accenture. While AI is being used for cybercrimes (e. g. bots or deep fakes),  the technology itself also is the most promising technology to counter cyber criminality,  with savings after the deployment of USD 11 million second only to security intelligence  and the sharing of threats. Nonetheless, it is also the least applied technology to date,  with 38 percent adoption in companies, ranking higher only than policy automation and  analytics, two technologies that form the basis for AI.  However, instead of continuing the head-to-head race between black hat and white hat  hackers that came to light when high stakes data leaks occurred, security by deliberate  design is moving into focus. Most noteworthy are advances in blockchain and federated  learning. Blockchain infrastructure can accelerate the R&D of AI models. Firstly, when a  trustworthy track record of each individual contribution to a research project is stored  online, the sharing, deployment and commercialization of AI models can be substan tially increased and enhanced. Secondly, federated learning, allowing the deployment of  an AI model on decentralized, sensitive and protected data, allows the utilization of AI  on smaller datasets, without the need for prior aggregation. It also allows the process ing of incredible amounts of data, each done locally, eliminating the need for one central  high-utility computing center, all the while providing data security by design. On an inter national level, Europe ranks highest among the world’s regions in terms of cybersecu rity preparedness, stemming from much regulatory awareness, frameworks and guide lines. However, on a country level, Germany and Estonia (as the EU’s best) both rank 5th,  behind the USA, Canada, Australia and Malaysia. Finally, while IT Security “Made in Ger many” is arguably a household name, effective measures are lagging behind, especially in  the public sector, as made obvious by the 2018 hack advent calendar.  computing holds promises, it also implies risks,  not the least in relation to privacy and security.  Every network endpoint (i. e. computer, smart phone, printer, WIFI router, even smart tooth brushes) is at risk of being hacked – concerns  have given rise to investments in ways to secure  edge computing and launch a new cybersecurity  market.lic security).83 Given the overlap with many of its  existing industrial and economic strengths, the  EU has identified edge computing as a pillar for  its AI ambitions, through which it aims to harvest  business and industry data.84 Despite a volume of  USD 3.5 billion in 2019, the edge computing mar ket is still nascent and set to grow by 37 percent  on average between 2020 and 2027.85 While edge 
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership35 a means to hyper-secure communication across  the 12,000 kilometers distance to earth)93 and the  establishment of a quantum network between  Beijing, Shanghai and the satellite – a similar com munication network establishing proof-of-concept  for a “quantum-based internet”94. Key to achieving  “quantum hegemony” – a national goal embraced  by the Chinese leadership95 – is also a reportedly  USD 10 billion investment to build the National  Laboratory for Quantum Information Sciences  in Hefei.96 The EU also recognized the strategic  importance of QC, releasing a Quantum Manifesto  in 201697 that served as a precursor for the “Quan tum Technologies Flagship” announced in January  2020 by the new European Commission.98 The ini tiative aims to shape Europe’s quantum ecosys tem over the next 10 years with a total budget of  €1 billion. While the funding is significantly below  the funding levels in the US and China, the Euro pean efforts could succeed based on close collab oration between scientific fields and international  research cohorts – assuming coherent leadership  execution, something the EU has struggled with in  the past.99 Recommendation 12 – Governing hardware   success to make, rather than buy, the AI infra structure of the future. The race to lead the next  20 years of widespread AI deployment and use  will be decided in the field of edge computing. As  of today, Europe has left most of this market to  non-European entities. Contrary to the purely sci ence-focused pioneering mission of ECSEL (Elec tronic Components and Systems for European  Leadership) and EPI (European Processor Initia tive), the EU should not only aspire to research  the best possible devices, but also to manufac ture them for the best domestic market fit – per haps through a CERN-like compute design and  development hub as part of a renewed transat lantic partnership (see Chapter 2.3). By focusing  its efforts on applicability and best-in-class edge  devices, the EU can secure the critical hardware  infrastructure in, for instance, automotive man ufacturing and the underlying connectivity of  emerging Industry 4.0 applications. Such infra structure will in turn facilitate the development of  increasingly advanced technologies, including QC,  neuromorphic computing, and Brain-Computer  Interface (BCI) systems. However, the creation of While today’s race for market share in the chip  industry is dominated by US and Asian power  houses (see Chapter 1.3), it is worth looking at the  next generation of computing chip design. Two  rival technologies, which do not rely on the same  core chip design, are gaining ground: neuromor phic computing (NC or Spiked Neural Networks)  and quantum computing (QC).86 Neuromorphic  computing, which seeks to simulate human brain  activity, could deliver a long-awaited technological  leap toward a more efficient and “human” form of  computation.87 While it will in theory help to close  the gap between machine and human cognitive  processes, it remains in the fundamental stages,  residing mainly in US private-sector and academic  research labs. IBM’s Watson has been pioneer ing this field, with Intel following closely with its  NC chip designed to identify smells. But promis ing competitors can also be found in Europe with  the Human Brain Project (HBP), a collaboration  of universities and private researchers. Driven by  both the biology and the computer science fields,  the initiative is tasked with breaking the last digital  barrier – thought by some experts to be the key to  creating artificial general intelligence (AGI).88  The more immediate breakthroughs, however, will  likely come from QC. Although still currently out side the planning horizon of most enterprises, QC  could have strategic impacts in key businesses or  operations. Recognizing the strategic importance  of QC, the US White House called Quantum Infor mation Science the “next technological revolution”  in 201889 and placed “American Leadership in Arti ficial Intelligence, Quantum Information Sciences,  and Strategic Computing” second on its list of R&D  priorities for 2020, trailing only the “Security of  the American People.”90 In 2020, the administra tion repeatedly ramped up funding, reaffirming  its commitment to R&D of non-defense related AI  and Quantum Computing Information Systems,  approving almost half a billion dollars, and plan ning to increase the budget in 2021 to USD 1.5  billion for AI and USD 699 million to build its  own quantum internet network.91,92 While China  is generally struggling to establish itself in fun damental research, it has achieved critical mile stones in the quantum computing space, includ ing the launch of the first quantum satellite in  2016 (a satellite using quantum entanglement as 
363. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership On the policy side, the World Economic Forum pur sues this approach by promoting the concept of  “agile governance,”105 which aims to reshape exist ing technology policy development processes by  incorporating a design thinking approach and mak ing use of a whole spectrum of policy instruments –  including laws, investment incentives, standards  and certification, and regulatory sandboxes. Agile  governance follows a pattern of research, ideation,  testing, prototyping and other cycles in small test  settings before scaling successful applications. At  the level of implementation within organizations,  it is increasingly understood that AI governance  needs to address four dynamics:  1. data sourcing and cleaning; 2. machine learning models;  3. societal impact; and  4. organizational oversight. (See box below.)   The recognition of responsible technology as a  key differentiating feature, rather than merely as  a compliance issue, has driven more companies to  pay greater attention to AI governance. Companies  such as Microsoft and Apple have taken promi nent stands on responsible, fair, and secure data  technologies – in stark contrast to the oft-criticized  approach to data privacy and utilization by Google  and Facebook (e. g. the Cambridge Analytica  scandal). In 2019, Apple changed the underlying  architecture of its voice assistant “Siri” to a tech nique called federated learning, which deployed  the actual machine learning inference right on the  phone, rather than in the cloud, thus proving the  concept of data security-by-design. Put simply,  data that never makes it to the cloud, but remains  with its owner, cannot be appropriated or stolen  in hacks that typically target huge aggregations of  centrally stored data. Similarly, privacy-by-design  products serve an increasing market demand  in response to continuing data leak and misuse  scandals. In 2019, Deutsche Telekom launched  its data-secure smart assistant “Hallo Magenta.”  Leveraging the EU’s reputation for its focus on  data privacy, the demand for “Hallo Magenta” out stripped supply only a short while after the prod uct release. While quantifying the specific market  trends for products with privacy at their core is dif ficult, the introduction of CCPA, GDPR and HIPAA106  have prompted data-protection market projec tions that show an increase from USD 57 billion in  2017 to USD 198.6 billion by 2026.107these manufacturing platforms will entail signifi cant R&D costs, and it is likely that the benefits be  limited to private entities if they are funded and  spearheaded by private contributors. Public aegis,  or at least governance, of these new technologi cally superior infrastructures must be the bedrock  of any development.  Recommendations on Commercialization   (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19) 3.4 AI Governance, beyond   AI ethics and compliance  With steadily improving AI capabilities, the  need for governance and regulation has quickly  become a matter of consensus among policymak ers and academia. Since 2014–15, private com panies, research institutions and public sector  organizations have issued more than 84 principles  and guidelines for ethical AI,100 with most govern ment-driven initiatives coming out of Europe and  Canada, and most civil society and industry-driven  initiatives emerging in North America. One of the  most recent and widely acknowledged set of AI  principles was published by the OECD in May 2019  and has been adopted by 42 countries.101 These ethics principles have provided impor tant “North Stars” for AI governance, allowing the  emergence of a consensus around a number of  central themes, including privacy, accountability,  safety and security, transparency and explain ability, fairness and non-discrimination, human  control of technology, professional responsibil ity, and promotion of human values.102 However,  research shows that they have had a limited effect  on decision making when it comes to the actual  design of algorithms,103 underlining the growing  awareness that AI ethics principles are insufficient  to shift paradigms in AI product development.  Thus, the global debate on AI ethics has reached a  stage at which companies and governments now  need to translate AI ethics principles into action able governance structures and systems, finding  answers not to “what” is needed in AI governance  but “how” it can be implemented.104
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership37 DRILL DOWN: Governing the value creation  of AI-powered products and services Data sourcing and cleaning:  Machine learning algorithms can be very good for infer ring the relationship between variables in a dataset, allowing data scientists to predict,  prescribe or optimize a target variable. However, such predictions are inherently based  on relationships within the dataset. If there are systematic biases or injustices in the past  data, a machine learning algorithm will include and possibly amplify them. A company in  search of top-notch managers might design a machine learning model that predicts the  qualities of top corporate executives, but the model might recommend that the company  hire nothing but Caucasian men from economically advantageous backgrounds, simply  because this is one of the clearest patterns in the historic dataset.  Machine learning models:  Even in data sets with little bias, AI systems themselves can  lead to discriminatory predictions or recommendations, which makes it important for  any AI governance process to also audit the machine learning models. Machine learning  uses statistical models to recognize patterns in data (input), to predict events or to pre scribe actions (output). Those models are usually based on the creation and selection of  features, stemming from the engineers’ understanding and framing of the problem. Une qual access to digital skills has resulted in a mostly Caucasian and male group of highlevel computer scientists who reinforce a small set of conscious or subconscious biases.  Societal impact: An AI system working well and relatively bias-free at a technical level  can still lead to unintended impact if the creators fail to understand second- and third-or der effects of the system. The consequences can be observed in frequent headlines  about ethically and morally questionable actions by tech companies. High-profile cases  of fraud and ethical violations are of a different quality in the tech space, as AI obfuscates  and modularizes processes to the point where a single human cannot comprehend an  algorithm’s performance at all possible scales and in all potential scenarios. One nota ble example is the Centrelink debt recovery scandal, in which a revamped government  benefits system in Australia replaced manual compliance checks, forcing many vulnera ble Australians into a difficult process to prove their eligibility for much-needed welfare  support. The “political disaster” that Centrelink caused continued into 2020, underscoring  the need for organizations – public and private alike – to consider the far reaching impli cations of the AI systems they develop and deploy. Hence, to ensure healthy economies  and societies, AI governance should include requirements for societal impact tests –  using the principles of system mapping, for example – to anticipate unintended second-  and third-order effects.  Organizational oversight:  Ensuring that the above-mentioned safeguards are established  and operationalized requires oversight processes and structures at the organizational level.  As a new domain that requires close governance, AI presents an opportunity to re-think  organizational governance as a whole. Aside from the design of guidelines, staff training,  the introduction of new positions such as ethics architects and external oversight bodies,  one emerging approach is to integrate “nudging” into governance design. This feeds off  behavioral economics insights that show rules and training programs often fail to produce  the desired change because humans are not rational beings and do not adapt behaviors in  response to new rules or knowledge. Nudging often works better.
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership38 experience in consumer protection, for example  through certification processes and labels for eco logical products or responsible supply chain man agement, the EU has the tools to develop trusted  certificates or labels that inform users about the  responsibility of technology products and ser vices. Such a certification could help consumers  make informed decisions and thus create incen tives for companies and organizations to opera tionalize their AI ethics principles. Labels could be  awarded by an audit and certification body mod elled after the US Food and Drug Administration  (FDA), which assesses and approves drugs before  they are released to the general public.109  Recommendations on Governance   (R1), (R8), (R13), (R18)Recommendation 13 – Set deep tech stand ards and benchmarks for the operationaliza tion of AI ethics and promote responsible tech  through an “AI TüV” for ethics certification.   Considering the so-called “Brussel’s Effect”108 and  the EU’s expertise in shaping international stand ardization regimes, the region is well-positioned  to shape the tech standards for the next gener ation of the digital economy. The EU has already  proven itself as an international standard-setter  for data protection and guidelines for ethical AI,  but this can only be the first step. Now, operation alization of AI ethics is required, spearheaded by  companies that see AI ethics and data protection  not only as a mere compliance issue, but also as  a key business differentiator. Building on the EU’s 
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership39 58 Clement (2020): Global digital population as of July 2020.  Statista, in: https://www.statista.com/statistics/617136/ digital-population-worldwide/ [2 Nov 2020].  59 The Economist (2020): Africa’s population will double  by 2050, in: https://www.economist.com/specialreport/2020/03/26/africas-population-will-double-by-2050  [2 Nov 2020].   60 Our World in Data (2020): Research and data to make  progress against the world’s largest problems, in https:// ourworldindata.org/ [2 Nov 2020].   61 Lee (2018): AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the  New World Order. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, in: https:// www.amazon.de/AI-Superpowers-China-Silicon-Valley/ dp/132854639X [2 Nov 2020].   62 Thompson (2020): SpaceX to launch next 60 Starlink  internet satellites today. Here is how to watch live. Space,  in: https://www.space.com/spacex-starlink-5-internetsatellites-launch-webcast.html [2 Nov 2020]. 63 Kenya (Nadella 2015, Chesky 2015, Zuckerberg 2016,  Ma 2017); Ethiopia (Dorsey 2019, Ma 2019); Rwanda  (Ma 2017 and 2018); Tunisia (Brin 2018); Ghana (Dorsey  2019, Ma 2019); Togo (Ma 2019); and Nigeria (Zuckerberg  2016, Pichai 2017, Dorsey 2019, Ma 2019). Cuvellier  (2019): Tech giants’ visits to African countries. Twitter  tweet Dec. 10, 2019, in: https://twitter.com/Cvllr/ status/1204367469030367232 [2 Nov 2020]. 64 Dorsey (2019): Tweet Nov. 27, 2019, in: https://twitter.com/ jack/status/1199774792917929984 [2 Nov 2020].  65 Adeoye (2019): Google has opened its first Africa Artificial  Intelligence lab in Ghana. CNN, in: https://edition.cnn. com/2019/04/14/africa/google-ai-center-accra-intl/index. html [2 Nov 2020].  66 In 2016, the Chinese Academy of Sciences set up two  provincial exploration habitats in Hainan and Xinjiang as  a feature of a “Computerized Earth under the Information  Silk Road” activity to assemble space-based remote  detecting information for various tasks under the BRI,  especially in South and Southeast Asia. Simultaneously,  Chinese ventures have been advancing the development  of Beidou#, a Chinese-developed, worldwide satellite  route framework, GPS equivalent that will increase China’s  surveillance and military capabilities. 67 Dann, Lubig, Schmand, Xiong (2019): China’s belt and road  initiative: A guide to market participation. Deutsche Bank,  in: https://cib.db.com/docs_new/DB_Belt-and-Road_Report. pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 68 Converge! Network Digest (2018): China funds peace  subsea cable from Pakistan to Kenya, in: https://www. convergedigest.com/2018/01/china-funds-peace-subseacable-from.html []. 69 Dewan (2019): In the race for AI supremacy, has India  missed the bus? The Economic Times, in: https:// economictimes.indiatimes.com/small-biz/startups/ features/in-the-race-for-ai-supremacy-has-indiamissed-the-bus/articleshow/69836362.cms?utm_ source=contentofinterest&utm_medium=text&utm_ campaign=cppst [2 Nov 2020].   Wheeler (2020): China’s Digital Silk Road (DSR): the new  frontier in the digital arms race? Silk Road Briefing, in:  https://www.silkroadbriefing.com/news/2020/02/19/ chinas-digital-silk-road-dsr-new-frontier-digital-arms-race/  [2 Nov 2020]. 70 Menon, Vazirani, Roy (2017): Rewire for growth:  Accelerating India’s economic growth with artificial  intelligence. Accenture, in: https://www.accenture.com/_ acnmedia/PDF-68/Accenture-ReWire-For-Growth-POV-1912-Final.pdf#zoom=50 [2 Nov 2020]. 71 European Commission (2018): State of the Union 2018:  Towards a new ‘Africa – Europe Alliance’ to deepen  economic relations and boost investment and jobs, in:  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ IP_18_5702 [2 Nov 2020].    72 European Commission (2020): Digital Innovation Hubs  (DIHs) in Europe, in: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-singlemarket/en/digital-innovation-hubs [2 Nov 2020].  73 Jones and Tonetti (2019): Nonrivalry and the economics  of data. Graduate School of Stanford Business, in https:// www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/working-papers/ nonrivalry-economics-data [2 Nov 2020].  74 World Economic Forum (2020): q. Datum: The marketplace  for big data, in: https://f69aa27b9b6c6702e27b-ffbfd eddb5f7166a1729dfea28599a63.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/ raw_54206_15080ceb05f4b9ba9be630b4ccb74c06_ qDatum-Presentation-Investors14-PDF.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 75 TrustArc (2016): 2016 TRUSTe/NCSA Consumer Privacy  Infographic – US Edition, in: https://www.trustarc.com/ resources/privacy-research/ncsa-consumer-privacyindex-us/ [2 Nov 2020].  76 Microsoft (2020): The Open Data Initiative, in: https://www. microsoft.com/en-us/open-data-initiative [2 Nov 2020].  77 AWS Marketplace (2020), in: https://aws.amazon.com/ marketplace [2 Nov 2020]. 78 GAIA-X (2020): Germany and France take the lead as  Europe makes first step towards building a European data  infrastructure, in: https://www.data-infrastructure.eu/ GAIAX/Redaktion/EN/Press-Releases/20200604-germanyand-france-take-the-lead-as-europe-makes-first-steptowards-building-a-european-data-infrastructure.html  [2 Nov 2020]. 79 Solid (2020): Home, in: https://solid.mit.edu/ [2 Nov 2020]. 80 UK Research and Innovation (2020): Databox: PrivacyAware Infrastructure for managing personal data, in:  https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=EP%2FN028260%2F2  [2 Nov 2020]. 81 European Commission (2020): Communication from the  Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,  the European Economic and Social Committee and the  Committee of the Regions, in: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1593073685620&uri=CELEX %3A52020DC0066 [2 Nov 2020]. 82 “Edge computing” generally refers to the processing and  storing data close to the source in smart devices, rather  than in centralized data centers that are spread across  the globe, as is the current practice. It is estimated that by  2021, 25 billion things will be connected, creating a wealth  of data and increasing demands for processing the data  on the devices or nearby. Closer proximity promises lower  latency rates, saving response time, bandwidth cost savings  as well as data safety and privacy – crucial in autonomous  vehicles, precision manufacturing, or healthcare.
3. Evolving preconditions for AI leadership40 83 Grand View Research (2020): Edge computing market size,  share and trends analysis report by component (Hardware,  software, services, edge-managed platforms), by industry  vertical (healthcare, agriculture), by region, and segment  forecasts, 2020–2027, in: https://www.grandviewresearch. com/industry-analysis/edge-computing-market [2 Nov 2020]. 84 European Commission (2020): White paper: On artificial  intelligence: A European approach to excellence and trust.  Pages 4 and 8, in: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/ commission-white-paper-artificial-intelligence-feb2020_ en.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 85 Fior Markets (2020): Global edge computing market  is expected to reach 18.36 Billion by 2027: Fior  Markets, in: https://www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2020/06/23/2052306/0/en/Global-Edge-ComputingMarket-Is-Expected-to-Reach-18-36-Billion-by-2027-FiorMarkets.html#:~:text=Newark%2C%20NJ%2C%20June%20 23%2C,the%20forecast%20period%202020%2D2027  [2 Nov 2020]. 86 Quantum physics introduces two specific circumstances:  superposition and entanglement. Superposition is the state  quantum bit (qubit) that allows it to be not only “0” or “1”  (as a traditional binary bit, the basic unit of information  in silicon-based computing), but also “0 and 1” as a state  in itself. Quantum entanglement is a phenomenon in  which two particles are in connected states (the same or  opposite), independent from their physical location. These  two phenomena allow QC to solve certain types of complex  problems that traditional supercomputers cannot. 87 Neuromorphic computing is a chip infrastructure designed  based on the human brain’s neurons to run AI more  effectively. The market of neuromorphic computing in the  US alone is expected to grow to USD 6.48 billion in 2024, up  from 1.49 billion in 2016.  88 Jilk, Herd, Read, O’Reilly (2017): Anthropomorphic  reasoning about neuromorphic AGI safety. Taylor & Francis  Online, in: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0 952813X.2017.1354081 [2 Nov 2020]. For the definition of  artificial general intelligence, see chapter 4.1. 89 Executive office of the President of the United States  (2018): National strategic overview for quantum  information science, in: https://www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2018/09/National-Strategic-Overviewfor-Quantum-Information-Science.pdf [2 Nov 2020].  90 Mulvaney and Kratsios (2018): Memorandum for the heads  of executive departments and agencies, in: https://www. whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/M-18-22.pdf  [2 Nov 2020]. 91 A Budget for America’s Future (2020): Advancing United  States leadership in the industries of the future, in: https:// www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/FY21Fact-Sheet-IOTF.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 92 Castellanos (2020): White house plans to boost AI,  Quantum funding by 30%. The Wall Street Journal, in:  https://www.wsj.com/articles/white-house-plans-to-boostai-quantum-funding-by-30-11597420800 [2 Nov 2020]. 93 Popkin (2017): China’s quantum satellite achieves ‘spooky  action’ at record distance. American Association for  the Advancement of Science, in: https://www.aaas.org/  [2 Nov 2020].  94 Division of Quantum Physics and Quantum Information  (2020): Quantum communication backbone network  (Beijing-Shanghai), in: quantum.ustc.edu.cn/web/en/ node/350 [2 Nov 2020]. 95 Kania and Costello (2018): Quantum Hegemony? China’s  ambitions and the challenge to US innovation leadership.  Center for a new American Security, in: https://www.cnas. org/publications/reports/quantum-hegemony [2 Nov 2020]. 96 Katwala (2018): Why China’s perfectly placed to be  quantum computing’s superpower. Wired, in: www.wired. co.uk [2 Nov 2020]. 97 Binosi (2016): Quantum manifesto endorsement. Qurope,  in: qurope.eu/manifesto [2 Nov 2020]. 98 European Commission (2020): Quantum Technologies  Flagship, in: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/ policies/quantum-technologies-flagship [2 Nov 2020]. 99 Kupferschmidt (2019): Europe abandons plans for ‘flagship’  billion-euro research projects. American Association for  the Advancement of Science, in: https://www.sciencemag. org/news/2019/05/europe-abandons-plans-flagship-billioneuro-research-projects [2 Nov 2020]. 100 Jobin , Ienca , Vayena (2019): The global landscape of AI  ethics guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence, in: https:// www.nature.com/articles/s42256-019-0088-2 [2 Nov 2020]. 101 The Observatory publishes practical guidance on how to  implement the AI principles, and supports a live database  of AI policies and initiatives globally. It also compiles  metrics and measurement of global AI development and  uses its convening power to bring together the private  sector, governments, academia, and civil society.  102 Newman (2020): Decision points in AI governance: Three  case studies explore efforts to operationalize AI principles.  Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity. UC Berkeley, in:  https://cltc.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/ Decision_Points_AI_Governance.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 103 McNamara, Smith, Murphy-Hill (2018): Does ACM‘s code  of ethics change ethical decision making in software  development? Association for Computing Machinery, in.  https://people.engr.ncsu.edu/ermurph3/papers/fse18nier. pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 104 Newman (2020): Decision points in AI governance: Three  case studies explore efforts to operationalize AI principles.  Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity. UC Berkeley, in:  https://cltc.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/ Decision_Points_AI_Governance.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 105 WEF (2019): Global Technology Governance: A  Multistakeholder Approach. Page 10-11, in: www3. weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Technology_Governance. pdf [2 Nov 2020].  106 California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), General Data  Protection Regulation (GDPR), Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability Act (HIPAA). 107 Verified Market Research (2019): Global data protection  market size by industry vertical (BFSI, IT and telecom,  government and defense, healthcare, manufacturing, and  others), by geographic scope and forecast, in: https://www. verifiedmarketresearch.com/product/data-protectionmarket/ [2 Nov 2020]. 108 The “Brussels effect” refers to the way standards set by the  EU for, say, cars or chemicals are then adopted globally, 109 Wired (2019): AI algorithms need FDA-styles drug trials, in:  https://www.wired.com/story/ai-algorithms-need-drugtrials/ [2 Nov 2020].
4. The next frontier in AI R&D41 4.1 Creating and understanding AI   or the barrier of contextualization  Over the past few years, AI has arrived in main stream public debate and stirred a necessary  discourse about its potential and its risks. Unfor tunately, however, AI is too often improperly  described as a “magic” tool or an all-knowing,  all-powerful entity that exerts its influence and  leaves humans with no power to control it. Lumi naries such as Stephen Hawking have fueled this  discussion by warning that AI “could spell the end  of the human race.”110 Elon Musk, despite hav ing toned down his earlier dire warnings about  AI, still says that it “scares the hell out of”111 him.  While AI over the last decade has developed at a  breathtaking speed, current AI capabilities remain  narrow – each algorithm can only solve one very  specific or narrow task. To move from narrow AI  to an AI system that can tackle a wider variety of  complex problems, and ultimately reach cogni tive capabilities similar to or better than those of  humans (a state referred to as artificial general  intelligence or AGI) will require a solution to a criti cal bottleneck – causality and an understanding of  the relationship between cause and effect.4. The next frontier in AI R&D The vast benefits of AI have yet to be reaped.  For the past five decades, AI has cycled between  periods of intense hype and the “AI winters”  that followed as the technologies failed to reach  over-inflated expectations and investment in  the field evaporated. Even in the current envi ronment of widespread funding, research and  adoption, development remains constrained by  the current state of statistics research, the limited  understanding of AI technology outside expert  circles, and the high complexity of its deployment.  Unleashing AI for humanity’s benefit will rely on  the field’s ability to make the technology easier  to explain, the introduction of regulatory spheres  that ensure transparency and accountability, and  the introduction of new approaches to AI’s basic  underlying mechanisms. In addition to discussing  some of these challenges, this chapter analyzes  “explainable AI,” a crucial sub-field that could help  to address many of these barriers.  
4. The next frontier in AI R&D42 scientists have tried an array of methods to ele vate AI into more sophisticated spheres, but they  remain restricted to the mathematical realm of  patterns or trial and error, working with matter  that understands neither causality, context nor  emotions (Chapter 3.4). While those restrictions  have limited progress in AI, new machine learn ing models are starting to push the boundaries of  what had previously been impossible (although  still relying on probabilistic models). “Emerging  transfer-learning” and “few-shot learning” models  can complement the three main machine learning  models in place today – supervised, unsupervised,  and reinforcement learning. While these models  will advance efforts to crack the code of causality  and enable more human-like learning, they remain  probabilistic models that can only augment nar row AI rather than solving the challenge of AGI. The US DARPA is one of the primary forces  behind the push to expand AI capabilities. The  agency articulates areas of targeted research that  align with the aforementioned obstacles, includ ing: new capabilities (better understanding and  easier accreditation of AI systems); robust AI  (strengthening models against incorrect predic tions or labelling to increase reliability in tactical  situations); adversarial AI (protecting AI against  attacks driven by manipulated training data and/ or exploiting the inherent limitations of pattern  recognition by purposefully exposing AI to rigged  data); high performance AI (introducing AI that  can run on smaller devices but handle less struc tured data); and its artificial intelligence explo ration (AIE) program, which focuses on high risk,  high yield research to develop the next-generation  technology after machine learning.112  Recommendation 14 – Construct a European  Center of Excellence atop leading French   contextual AI institutes. The French research  institutes CNRS and INRIA113 are the EU leaders  in contextual AI, investigating how to break into  the next frontier.114 Centralizing the ownership  and guidance of this critical task under the ethical  guidance of the AI HLEG would allow the EU to  target research on commercially viable solutions  (e. g. autonomous driving). This will create push  mechanics from the industry to ensure market-fo cused research that translates into the strength -Contextualization and causality are drivers of  human learning. When children drop a toy, they  innately understand the cause and effect of that  action – let go of an object in mid-air, and the  object will drop. While unfamiliar with the physical  concept of gravity, they have an inherent ability as  human children to grasp the causality. Machines  cannot yet understand this concept. In reality,  most AI is uniquely trained per task. Once trained  in one pursuit, an AI system will need to be  retrained and recalibrated to find and apply pat terns in a new context, lacking versatility of appli cations – a difficulty called generalization. Without  logical reasoning, effective few-shot learning, long  and short-term memory and abstract thinking, AI  will remain narrow (or weak) and limited in appli cations. At present, the field relies on statistics  as the primary foundation to make computers  act “smart,” but building something better will  require the introduction of new disciplines. Cur rently unknown approaches – perhaps based on  neuronal hardware – are needed to push today’s  narrow AI into new dimensions. Regardless of  the underlying technology, AI must move beyond  models that augment correlation with probabil istic theory in search of something that approx imates humans’ innate understanding of causa tion. The common concept of learning in humans  and machines – reward and consequence –  appears to be reaching its limits in current com puter science. Instead, we need a model that  grasps the basic truths of our world – a system  that doesn’t predict based on experience but that,  at its core, understands why and how our bodies,  thoughts and environment operate. Without such  a technological leap, machine learning based on  probabilistic models can only solve problems that  we can define in a pre-ordained space. These limitations help to explain the stall in auton omous driving. Although experts have devel oped vast capabilities for autonomous vehicles,  a driverless car needs to adapt to and handle an  endless number of scenarios. Detecting a person  on a street is easy. Detecting a person, pushing  a shopping cart and shielding under an umbrella  in the rain is another story. If a car can only rec ognize a shopping cart and an umbrella, it must  understand by causal relation that a person might  be standing underneath, even if not visible. Data 
4. The next frontier in AI R&D43 and deep learning models, because the systems  independently adapt their models without human  interference. Even if a person could crack open  the black box and observe the layers and layers  of potentially millions of different nodes and con nections, all of them calibrating and recalibrating  in real time, the process would be far too complex  for the human mind to grasp. As a result, we are  left to rely on inherent trust in a largely unknow able system. Explainable artificial intelligence  (XAI) has emerged to try to solve this problem.  XAI describes a type of AI models that produce  output that humans can easily understand. This  understanding does not require all AI operators to  understand how the model works, but it ensures  understanding of the limitations of a result, why  the model works and why it does not. XAI serves  as an interface between the mechanics of a model  and the recipient of its output. The field aims to  establish greater trust in AI-powered applications  by ensuring that such products comply with regu lations, can be audited, are not biased, etc. Gener ally, XAI is divided into three stages:  1. pre-modelling explainability, which focuses on  understanding the data used in the develop ment of AI models;  2. explainable modelling, which involves models  that are developed with the purpose of being  explainable; and  3. post-modelling, which identifies explanations for  previously developed models. In recent years,  researchers have focused their studies heavily  on the post-modelling explainability of AI.  The leading approaches to create XAI include  the DARPA-XAI project, the Local Interpretable  Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME) initiative,  and guidance from the UK’s Alan Turing Insti tute, which introduces processes and guides for  AI engineers and providers to ensure the compli ance and user centricity of their models (for both  completed and new models).115 Led by these and  similar initiatives, research progress in XAI has  accelerated rapidly. Google’s recent White Paper  on AI Explainability highlights further key advance ments. Likewise, researchers are exploring the  psychology of explanation, as a successful XAI sys tem must provide transparency and explanations  to people that draw on lessons from philosophy,  cognitive psychology, human-computer interac tion and social sciences.116 ening of long-term European AI excellence.  Beyond the commercial aspects, however, contex tual AI as a framework needs to achieve interna tional acceptance. Hence, the EU research center  must collaborate with internationally diverse but  similarly value-based research centers around  the world, like the Alan Turing Institute (UK) and  Carnegie Mellon University (US). Strengthening  the progress of contextual AI while also defining  its boundaries is a culturally sensitive and subjec tive challenge – one where the strengths of the  AI HLEG are needed to complement the strong  policy and governance focus of both the Alan  Turing Institute and the Carnegie Endowment for  International Peace (parent to the CMU). This will  untap both the academic and economic potential  needed to drive progress at the nexus of various  technologies and establish the foundation needed  to discover the as-yet-unknown “next big thing”.  Recommendations on Talent and Research   (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16) 4.2 Explainable AI becoming   a key research field  Despite still limited capabilities, AI has already  become a large part of daily life, and we rely on  algorithms every day to perform various tasks  quickly and efficiently. Thus, it is imperative that  we understand how these algorithms work. This  is even more important in times of eroding trust  in the digital economy. According to the Global  Web Index, 24 percent of global internet users  surveyed in 2019 said they do not understand  computers and new technology, a rise of almost  15 percent increase on the previous year. Addi tionally, 74 percent of user across Europe said  they think new technologies will do more harm  than good, and only 25 percent support the use  of AI as part of societal management.  However, explaining AI systems and how they  reach conclusions remains a difficult task. When  we use AI to tackle larger and more complicated  problems, we inevitably encounter a “black box  problem” – we can see the input and the out put, but cannot fully understand how the system  got from point A to point B. Currently, we cannot  precisely explain the decisions made by AI appli cations, especially ones based on unsupervised 
4. The next frontier in AI R&D44 ZOOM OUT – Beyond Algorithms: Emotional intelligence  Artificial Emotional Intelligence, dubbed as emotion AI or the third wave of AI, can  be described as tools that facilitate a more natural interaction between machines and  humans. It includes improved algorithms that can gain insights about emotions from  analyzing large amounts of data. If a machine can identify emotions by analyzing var ious inputs, such as image or video feeds, then it is considered an emotionally intelli gent machine. This new wave of AI has already been applied in diverse industries and  fields, such as advertisement and recommendation engines, mostly to conduct customer  research. Other applications have emerged in domains such as call centers, mental  health, self-reporting, automotive, and assistive services.  Emotionally intelligent systems often overlap with and complement similar programs  that identify very subtle, very human phenomena. For example, the US startup Woebot  has developed an algorithmically enhanced application that provides interactive sup port for mental health patients and, when appropriate, prompts them to participate  more deliberately in the cognitive behavioral therapies prescribed by their psychiatrists.  Mindstrong Health takes this a step further for patients with severe mental illnesses, who  often get caught in a vicious cycle of treatment, release and relapse. By analyzing about  1,000 often-imperceptible markers in how patients interact with their mobile phones,  Mindstrong can alert them and their doctors when a relapse appears imminent.  By layering advanced emotional intelligence into these applications, these startups are  opening doors for patients to live more fulfilling lives. However, they naturally raise ethi cal questions about possible abuses and manipulation. The broader use of these systems  in new industries and fields has prompted calls for government and industry policies  to properly guide users of these systems and ensure they do not harm people. Security  and privacy concerns about emotional surveillance have become rampant among users.  Combined with developments in the field of Brain Computer-Interfaces (BCI) – technolo gies that can directly record and stimulate brain activity in humans – artificial emotional  intelligence systems could allow for the manipulation of people through personalized  targeting (e. g. in the form of political propaganda or as a hacker technique to maliciously  acquire personal information).  Therefore, policymakers need to wake up to the advent of the third wave of AI and create  policies that effectively curb any potential exploitation. The EU’s GDPR labelled biometrics  data as personal data that cannot be accessed without first seeking permission. However,  while emotions detected from facial images and voice synthesis are covered by this reg ulation because such data can be used to identify an individual, emotion-based data that  does not provide unique identification is currently unregulated. The GDPR and similar reg ulations should be revised to include bio-sensed data in the definition of biometrics data.
4. The next frontier in AI R&D45 DRILL DOWN – What are Brain-Computer-Interfaces (BCI)? BCI are both invasive and non-invasive tools to record and stimulate brain activity in  humans to communicate information. Intersecting AI with edge devices but also inter connecting human communication with these technologies via brain recording and brain  stimulation is likely to rearrange completely the technological playing field. The brain is  becoming an edge computing device. It and other devices will be communicating with  each other at bandwidths of 20 GB/s on a 5G network. Human-to-computer communica tion (i. e. typing, reading, watching a video) is currently stagnating at 0.63Mbits/s. Uncork ing that bottleneck and elevating human-to-human as well as human-to-computer com munication will unfold human cognition as the centerpiece of technology in ten years  time and beyond. Near-term use cases are of a medical nature, i. e. enabling robotic  limbs for patients suffering from cerebral palsy, certain strokes or injuries to the spinal  cord. Longer term possibilities, linking to the vision of Elon Musk’s BCI company Neural ink, including creating communication channels that allow humans to communicate with  computers as fast as they do with each other, essentially allowing humans to up- and  download thoughts or content to the and from the internet directly from their brain.Progress in this field is urgently needed. Many  of the controversies that surround sensitive use  cases of AI – such as recruitment, credit assess ments or predictive policing – could be solved  if the underlying AI system would be explaina ble and, hence, accountable. Solving the AI black  box problem would, therefore, unleash sub stantial digital growth. The policy frameworks  have already been put in place. A set of rights  introduced through the GDPR relate directly to  explainable AI, with an emphasis on oversight for  opaque AI systems and protections for EU citizens  who might suffer negative impacts from deci sions made by such systems. While some compa nies have bristled against the GDPR, this aspect can help establish some of the primary drivers  of widespread AI deployment – including ease of  use, an understanding of the technology among  the workforce and executives and users who trust  AI’s implications. Regarding of the technological  advancement, the efficiency gains of AI applica tions will never be fully realized without a solid  understanding of each AI-generated output. In  this sense, XAI is by its very nature at the heart  of the European governance effort to ensure  human-centric AI. Indeed, humanized AI has been  pioneered in Europe – not by enterprises, but by  governance bodies – centering the development  significantly deeper in the core of the European  market than elsewhere in the world.  Recommendation 15 – An AI to disagree with –  Lead the way toward a human AI symbiosis.  With ISO/IEC TR 24028:2020, the International  Organization for Standardization and the Inter national Electrotechnical Commission took a first  stab at standardizing trustworthiness in AI. How ever, similar to the Alan Turing Institute’s guide on  trustworthy AI, the standard does not include fully  scientific, actionable measures.117 These short comings are significant. As long as XAI – which  refers to methods and techniques in the applica -tion of AI such that the results of the solution can  be understood by humans – remains a theoretical  exercise, AI will not grow much beyond its current,  rather passive form. The challenge of working  with AI in real-time is knowing when to disagree.  When we enable AI to bring forward results that  humans can easily and quickly assess, compre hend and judge – then AI breaks the barrier to  actionable functionality. Having realized that,  DARPA is focusing on XAI to enable soldiers to  judge model output and learn when to trust it. In 
4. The next frontier in AI R&D46 in real estate, where poorly maintained AI systems  caused a spike in mortgage prices.118, 119 These cases raise questions about accountability  when AI-powered systems fail or lead to nega tive outcomes. Are developers culpable for the  systems they create, even if those systems learn,  adapt and change over time (as AI systems do)?  Can individuals be held accountable for outcomes  of the applications they use, even if the world’s  greatest AI experts can’t explain how the system  came to its decision? Currently, the acceptance  of AI decision making is the responsibility of the  respective users. But if users are increasingly pas sively affected (e. g. as patients receiving diagnosis  and treatment plans largely out of their control),  the accountability of AI developers – or even AI as  an entity on its own – seems increasingly reason able. However, it is not possible to punish com puter systems or hold them accountable for their  actions. As human-centered societies merging  into a reality where we temporarily cede control  over our decision-making to AI applications (e. g.  following a navigation system’s guidance or treat ment recommendation), we face the challenge of  an inherently unaccountable actor.  These issues go to the heart of AI’s role in society  and frame an outlook for the joint future of AI and  society – a future shaped on one hand by XAI and  a better understanding of AI decisions and their  impact, and on the other hand by decision-mak ing agents that by design cannot be held account able. Thus, legislators need to derive a balance of  accountability and responsibility between society,  individuals, and the agent (AI) and codify this bal ance in laws and regulations that will inevitably  shape AI’s role in our societies and in our lives.  In science fiction and futurist writing one pro posed solution to the twin challenges of account ability and contextualization is conscious AI – a  system that knows it is a machine and that we are  humans. This would require some kind of intellec tual representation of the self in machines. How ever, humans have yet to solve the mystery of  consciousness in themselves, let alone articulate  it for scientific augmentation. However, reasoning  AI, a system that abstractly connects causal rela -a similar sense, the EU must reap the benefits of  XAI not only as an interface between a model and  a human, but as an interface between theoretical  data observations and industry application. Possi ble applications include assisting structural engi neers in onsite assessments, screening terrain  and assisting avalanche search parties, as well as  bridging the gap between autonomy in driving  and the liability and understanding of the in-con trol human driver. Where humans understand a  recommendation, they can build on it – and will  never be replaced. Incentivizing EU researchers in  practical and industry oriented XAI competitions  to build models that solve real world challenges  by easing the interface between the model and  humans would put the EU in the lead internation ally with a practical pathway to explainable AI. Recommendations on Talent and Research   (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16) 4.3 Taming unfathomable AI   through accountability  We have yet to see even the first-order impacts  of XAI (e. g. increased commercial AI adoption in  companies). The barriers to contextualization,  causation and artificial general intelligence remain  in place, at least for now. However, none of the  breakthroughs in any of these fields will propel  AI forward without an overarching framework for  accountability. Especially as AI becomes increas ingly integrated into human-centered industries,  such as health care, people will have more and  more urgent questions about the accountability  for decisions made by or based on AI systems.  Currently, AI models merely guide human doc tors, who retain control of diagnoses or treat ment decisions for their patients. However, the  increasing strain on health care systems, currently  exacerbated by COVID-19, underscores a critical  need for humans to consider deeper AI integra tion into their systems. Given rising health care  costs, aging societies and global health emergen cies, people may need to rethink the luxury of  human-to-human treatment. Similar needs arise  in mobility, where autonomous systems lead to  collisions caused by humans who place too much  trust in the AI drive-navigation system, as well as 
4. The next frontier in AI R&D47 Recommendation 16 – Create the cornerstone  for reasoning AI – and scalable applications.   Owing to the high training costs and complexity of  the models, AI is costly and therefore has grown  to be a means for businesses to protect their mar kets. The discovery of the next milestones toward  better, reasoning AI, edging toward more gen erally skilled systems, will eventually bring down  these costs and thus enable widespread applica tions, resulting in a scalability of applications that  potentially supersedes the soaring power of the  current Silicon Valley empires – assuming they  don’t reach these milestones first. As the chal lenge concerns the multi-application of systems,  the breakthroughs will certainly emerge from  places where research spheres interweave. To  tackle this ambitious task, the EU must expose  researchers to a variety of industries and disci plines, including the medical, industrial, and legal  fields, to train a new generation of experts who  think holistically and possess a skill set that pro motes cross-disciplinary excellence – a critical  asset for the EU if it hopes to develop AI mod els that surpass current limitations. Fully funded  residency programs that further interlink the vast  but segmented European research space across  domains will introduce academic researchers to  each other and European industries (and thus  increasing talent retention for academia and  industry alike). This will align the EU’s strong but  often disagreeing stakeholders, and foster a gen eration of holistically and comprehensively edu cated academic and professionals in Europe, best  equipped to build scalable AI. Recommendations on Talent and Research   (R2), (R4), (R14), (R15), (R16)tionships, is within the realm of our understand ing. We simply have not yet found a language to  formulate the questions and seek the answers.  These questions and answers could become more  apparent with a consolidation of the research  sphere. None of the individual machine model  types will independently break through to artificial  general intelligence. The countries and regions  that interconnect their research and applications –  both in and adjacent to AI – will generate the crit ical step forward. We have seen numerous exam ples of this already. Neuromorphic computing and  evolutionary algorithms emerged at the nexus of  neuroscience and computer science. By inter secting neuroscience with hardware, brain-com puter interfaces have allowed us to communicate  directly with brain cells. We can see how, step by  step, scientific discovery edges closer to replicat ing, adopting and eventually replacing human  functions. Moonshot projects and million-dollar  research programs may make great leaps for ward and then suffer huge setbacks, but these are  the costs that a society must be willing to pay if it  seeks to drive true innovation in AI. For Europe,  this is good news. While the US dominates efforts  to develop the best tools to find answers to  existing problems, European researchers con tinue their drive toward fundamentally new  approaches. Publicly funded, historically proven  research centers throughout Europe are well-po sitioned to search for the next big thing, whatever  it might be. 
4. The next frontier in AI R&D48 115 ICO and The Alan Turing Institute (2020): Explaining  decisions made with AI, in: https://ico.org.uk/media/ for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/key-dataprotection-themes/explaining-decisions-made-withartificial-intelligence-1-0.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 116 Google (2020): AI explanations whitepaper, in: https:// storage.googleapis.com/cloud-ai-whitepapers/AI%20 Explainability%20Whitepaper.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 117 Zielke (2020): Is Artificial Intelligence Ready for  Standardization?, in: https://www.researchgate.net/ publication/341616218_Is_Artificial_Intelligence_Ready_for_ Standardization [2 Nov 2020]. 118 Wolfe (2014): Driving into the ocean and 8 other  spectacular fails as GPS turns 25. The World, in: https:// www.pri.org/stories/2014-02-17/driving-ocean-and-8-otherspectacular-fails-gps-turns-25 [2 Nov 2020]. 119 Sculley et. al. (2014): Machine learning: the high-interest  credit card of technical debt. Google Research, in: https:// storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-publication-data/ pdf/43146.pdf [2 Nov 2020].110 Cellan-Jones (2014): Stephan Hawking warns artificial  intelligence could end mankind. BBC News, in: https:// www.wired.com/story/ai-algorithms-need-drug-trials/  [2 Nov 2020]. 111 Clifford (2018): Elon Musk: ‘Mark my words- A.I. is far  more dangerous than nukes’. CNBC, in: https://www.cnbc. com/2018/03/13/elon-musk-at-sxsw-a-i-is-more-dangerousthan-nuclear-weapons.html [2 Nov 2020]. 112 DARPA (2020): AI next campaign, in: https://www.darpa.mil/ work-with-us/ai-next-campaign [2 Nov 2020]. 113 Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) and  Institut national de recherche en informatique et en  automatique (INRIA) . 114 Atomico and Slush (2018): The state of European Tech:  Chapter 6.3. Europe is home to the world’s leading AI  research community, in: https://2017.stateofeuropeantech. com/chapter/deep-tech/article/europes-engineeringengaging-data-science/ [2 Nov 2020].
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society49 ing these cognitive machines remains an expen sive pursuit. AI enterprise solutions are still largely  bespoke, with very few turnkey solutions ready to  integrate into any business’ IT infrastructure and  workflows. AI model creation and deployment is  a laborious and costly process, especially when  it needs to be tailor-made for each enterprise’s  needs.121 For startups in particular, the scarcity of  talent, the barriers that block access to sufficiently  large data pools, and the uphill battles against  cash- and data-rich digital platforms can prove  too expensive to overcome (see Chapter 3.1).  The same goes for the creation of the data ware houses and data lakes required to train and make  AI systems work.122 Having an engine without any  fuel is no use. Because of the cost hurdles, most non-tech com panies focus their investments on low-hanging  fruit and narrow use cases. While business lead ers acknowledge that AI implementation is crucial  for their company’s success, few deploy it beyond  a small handful of instances. In a 2019 survey,  three-quarters of global business leaders said 5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI    in the economy and society AI promises benefits for the economy (as cap tured by the German concept “Industry 4.0”) as  well as benefits for society at large (as promoted  through the Japanese vision of “Society 5.0”).120  However, leveraging AI’s potential to drive eco nomic and human growth will rely on active par ticipation from citizens, businesses, investors,  governments (as both regulators and users) and  civil society. This chapter will focus on four distinct  forces that will drive the adoption of AI:  1. the rise of corporate venture capital;  2. the underestimated role of Europe’s strength  in smart procurement;  3. the emergence of new business models; and  4. the growing potential of AI for public good.  5.1 The changing funding   landscape of the cognitive age Despite falling costs for cloud subscriptions,  access to knowledge, semiconductors and almost  every other component that goes into an AI sys tem – talent being the chief exception – develop 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society50 younger firms, especially in the field of AI. As the  pandemic recedes, Europe’s economies, firms and  citizens will urgently need the economic growth  that flows from increased regional competitive ness. Looking forward, we believe this need and  the upward trend in CVC will merge to propel a  concept called “collaborative innovation”, which  reflects that large incumbent firms can drive  growth by investing time, energy and capital in  overcoming the limitations of their in-house, cap tive R&D models. While these internal R&D opera tions are extremely good at delivering incremental  advancement, they struggle to create disruptive  products or entirely new markets. Meanwhile,  these large firms can help young companies to  overcome the constraints of scaling across frag mented markets and accessing venture capital.129  Considering the economic structure in Europe –  with its world-leading SMEs urgently in need of  a technological upgrade – the potential of these  partnerships to contribute to innovation and  growth is particularly high. Recommendation 17 – Promote “Creative  Upgrading” rather than “Creative Destruction.”  While traditional venture capital (VC) has a track  record in exerting pressure on industries through  investments in disruptive startups, CVC aims to  upgrade industries internally, without destroy ing their core businesses. The skills and incen tives of both VC and CVC are necessary to over haul Europe’s economies, so policymakers need to  look for ways to effectively pair them. This can be  achieved through a variety of measures – for exam ple, through tax incentives, publicly backed fundof-funds structures, or an incentive scheme that  encourages partnerships by providing a contingent  indemnity for losses from joint investments.  Recommendations on Commercialization   (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19) 5.2 The underestimated role   of smart procurement While CVC allows companies to complement  their R&D department’s efforts to drive innova tion, smart procurement can help foster innova tion along their supply chain. However, despite  a variety of AI applications designed to optimize they believed AI had the potential to substantially  transform their enterprises within the next three  years,123 but 58 percent of respondents said they  had embedded AI functions in only one business  unit or function (up from 47 percent the prior  year). Less than a third of respondents said they  integrated AI in multiple functions or business  units.124 In addition, companies overwhelmingly  seek to improve their marketing efforts or supply  chain management, rather than explore entirely  new business models.125  Meanwhile, the funding ecosystem that pro vides venture capital to AI startups has rapidly  expanded and diversified. In 2019, a record USD  26.6 billion was invested across more than 2,200  deals worldwide – up from roughly 580 deals and  USD 4.2 billion in 2014.126 While the EU lags the  quantity and volume of funding in the US and  China, trade tensions between the two powers  could slow investment and innovation. In addi tion, recent US legal reforms, such as the Foreign  Investment Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018  (FIRRMA)127 and White House decisions that have  limited the number of immigrants studying and  researching in the US could slow AI innovation  and investment there. These and other develop ments could shake up another maturing trend,  albeit one that remains nascent in the EU – corpo rate venture capital (CVC). Similar to the growth  of general CVC, which rose to USD 57.1 billion in  2019 from USD 17.9 billion in 2014, CVC funding  specifically to AI startups increased to USD 10.6  billion in 2019, up 71 percent on 2018. While still  accounting for the largest global share, CVC in the  US and China slowed between 2018 and 2019,  whereas in Europe there remains a clear growth  trajectory. The number of CVC-backed deals to  companies based in Europe grew by 19 percent in  2019, and the total value of these deals increased  by 38 percent.128 This development could be due  to the fact that AI and predictive data analytics in  Europe are driven more by a strong manufactur ing sector with predominantly mid-size and large  enterprises. It has yet to be seen how COVID-19 will impact the  availability of CVC. However, it is already evident  that the crisis should drive collaboration between  larger, well-established companies and smaller, 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society51 work needs to be complemented by efforts from  the German Research Center for Artificial Intel ligence (DFKI) and its European counterparts to  coordinate joint research streams and virtual  smart supply chain designs and trials. Also, mak ing smart supplier information as well as financial  market trading data (e. g. of future trades) acces sible in aggregate will be very useful, not only for  training supply chain management AI but also for  think tanks and government agencies to under stand economic shifts and trends.  Recommendations on Governance   (R1), (R8), (R13), (R18) 5.3 Data-driven business   model innovation Most businesses focus on AI deployments that  create efficiency gains (see Chapter 5.1 The chang ing funding landscape), an approach that arises  from a mindset of loss-avoidance or cost reduc tion. Too few companies consider AI as part of  a revenue-generating strategy, which is where  most business value derives. As this understand ing has started to trickle down, we have seen new  data-driven business models rather than mere  process or product upgrades. These models go  beyond the classical business-to-customer (B2C)  and business-to-business (B2B) business mod els in traditional economic sectors. Whether in  e-commerce, insurance,133 marketing or after-mar ket sales in the auto industry,134 new models have  emerged that serve both businesses and consum ers simultaneously (B2B2C). At the same time,  the growing deployment of blockchains facilitates  privacy assured peer-to-peer (P2P) value creation  and, in some cases, allows companies to address  the innovation needs of governments (B2G). While  these acronyms may appear as little more than  helpful labels to describe business setups, they  indicate a trend toward more dynamic web-based  value creation models that supplement the linear  models of traditional economies. The shift toward data-driven business models is  already happening, though their success depends  heavily on their ability to compete with estab lished tech platforms. While the revision of antitrust regulations (see DSA in Chapter 2.2) and data various supply chain operations, the impact and  implementation potential of AI-powered smart  procurement remains vastly underestimated.  While most digitization projects start with the  upgrading or development of new products and  services for customers, purchasing generally plays  a minor role, if any. Digital transformation of pro curement processes is still stuck in its infancy,  despite its enormous potential. It is estimated  that fully automated procurement processes  could save the 5,000 largest companies up to USD  86 billion annually, but as of 2018, fewer than  10 percent of companies used key technologies in  procurement.130 Considering that the post-COVID  era will put Chief Procurement Officers under fur ther pressure to “do more with less”, we expect  the demand for smart procurement to accelerate. Compared to other areas, Europe is well posi tioned to provide solutions in relation to smart  procurement. For example, SAP Ariba – which has  three times the global transaction count of Ama zon and Alibaba combined – offers a Procure-toPay suite that supports procurement and supply  chain collaboration. In 2019, SAP Ariba was recog nized by Gartner as the leader in smart procure ment, based on what the research firm described  as strong innovation and deep market under standing.131 European startups have also recog nized procurement as a growing market. While  it produced less than half the number of North  American procurement startups between 2001  and 2017 (172 versus 400), Europe accounted for  twice as many procurement startups as China  during this period.132 While the industry is consol idating through incumbents such as SAP Ariba,  the number of procurement startups allows com panies to explore a wealth of innovation oppor tunities to improve their performance. Focused  startup facilitation within Europe, together with  innovation partnerships with and acquisitions of  startups around the world by European software  and manufacturing companies, could further bol ster the continent’s competitiveness in this area. Recommendation 18 – Proliferate smart pro curement: Encourage European companies,  including the leader SAP Ariba, to create a smart  procurement ecosystem of startups that can  deliver unique functionality in this space. This 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society52 Finally, governments are racing to respond and  open themselves up for business with entrepre neurs and innovators, paving the way for B2G  and G2B business models that can bring together  the speed and ingenuity of startups with public  resources and funding.  Recommendation 19 – Facilitate the emer gence of B2B2C and P2P business models:  Focus startup support not on the product inno vation and application of advanced technology,  but more on the changing nature of underlying  business models, particularly B2B2C and P2P.  Both models address Europe’s problem with data  access, while also aligning with its emphasis on  the protection of the individual. The creation of  a White Book by a working group of US and UK  business school professors, entrepreneurs and  VCs describing best-in-class examples and case  studies of successful and unsuccessful models  and the subsequent distribution of this White  Book to European entrepreneurs could support  this trend. Recommendations on Commercialization   (R5), (R11), (R12), (R17), (R19) 5.4 AI for Public Good and the roles of  the public sector and civil society Although AI has existed in some form for sev eral decades, many governments and civil society  actors have only paid lip service to the promo tion and use of responsible AI for the public good.  In that void, for-profit companies became the  overwhelming influence on the development and  deployment of these technologies, including in the  sphere of public goods. Today, the direction of AI  advancement for the benefit of societies is driven  almost entirely by private-sector firms, including  Google’s AI for Good Program,136 SAP’s Billion Lives  Initiative137 and Microsoft’s portfolio of initiatives  (e. g. the AI for Accessibility grant program aimed  at empowering people with disabilities138 and the  AI for Health program that supports non-profits,  researchers and organizations in healthcare139).  Only recently has the global “tech for good” actor  landscape become more diverse, adding more  social entrepreneurs (e. g. the Global Innovation  Gathering), organizations that match nonprofits sharing mechanisms (see Chapter 3.1) could level  the playing field, trends in business model innova tion support innovators’ efforts to reach scale. Tra ditional B2B or B2C models are inherently linear,  with information and physical goods naturally flow ing from one entity to another. With the IoT and  advanced data analytics as a technological base for  exchange, such barriers are broken down in a busi ness model we expect to continue to proliferate:  B2B2C. In B2BC settings, company A sells a prod uct or service to a business, gaining customers  and/or data from Company b. In turn, company A  can keep those customers and/or use that data.  The car industry has started to embrace B2B2C  setups, which allow original equipment manufac turers to stay in touch with their customers and  assets and learn from their data while maintain ing their B2B relationships (e. g. with their distri bution networks). The same business rationale is  easily applicable to a range of other linear indus tries, including agriculture and medical equipment  manufacturing. Thus, done right, B2B2C can be  one of the most effective ways to acquire cus tomers and contruct a powerful data moat.135 As  such, it offers a tangible way for EU-based start ups to tap into the landscape of established and  respected companies across the region. Until a few years ago, the other key business  model innovation, peer-to-peer (P2P) models, only  played a niche role. A P2P business employs a  decentralized model, whereby individuals interact  directly with each other – for example, individuals  lending money to one another. Increasingly facil itated by the slow but steady rise in the adoption  of blockchain, these business models will not nec essarily rely on central stores of data. Although  not based on blockchain, one example of a P2P  model is embodied in the COVID-19 tracing apps,  especially the German Corona-Warn-App, which  does not save any user data in a centralized data  center. While this model naturally constrains the  value that companies can derive from user data,  P2P business owners can tap into the growing  awareness of customers around data protection  and privacy, opening new revenue streams that  do not need to rely on the monetization of user  data in the first place. 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society53 stands to benefit from AI systems and should  seek to extend new technological benefits to the  people it represents and the issues it addresses.  However, civil society still remains focused more  on questions around the regulation of AI. (In the  US, these discussions center on normative ethical  frameworks and responses to challenges, par ticularly those resulting from excessive govern ment power at local and state levels. In Europe,  the debate focuses more on the role of govern ments and regulation as counters to the impact  of corporations.) However, a number of academic  institutions and NGOs have started to fill the gaps,  including a group of organizations that com prise a transatlantic digital rights ecosystem. This  includes worldwide professional entities, such as  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  (IEEE),145 the Partnership on AI for the Benefit of  People and Society (PAI),146 and the OpenAI Insti tute.147 It includes more traditional NGOs, includ ing the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), the  American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Bits of Free dom (the Netherlands),148 the Open Rights Group  (UK),149 the Association for Technology and Inter net (ApTI, Romania),150 the Chaos Computer Club151  and NetzPolitik152 (Germany), and DFRI (Sweden).153  It also includes academic institutions, such as  the Markkula Center.154 Many of these organiza tions are members of European Digital Rights  (EDRi),155 a Brussels-based association of civil and  human rights organizations that, since its found ing in 2002, has advocated for digital rights and  freedoms at a supranational level. Most of the  European organizations have had little to say  about AI ethics in comparison with their American  peers, but they have been much more effective  in holding companies accountable for their use of  personal data. For example, the Austrian activist  Max Schrems filed a lawsuit against Facebook in  2013 that upended the transatlantic data-sharing  agreement Safe Harbor. The focus of civil soci ety on the regulation of AI, however, seems to  have come at the expense of efforts to promote  the potentially powerful benefits that applica tions of this technology could provide. This is a  crucial missed opportunity – one made worse by  the scarcity of AI and data science talent, most of  whom are drawn to high-paying jobs in the private  sector, rather than to the public sector and civil  society efforts. with data scientists (e. g. Data Science for Social  Good140 and DataKind141) and forums that convene  public- and private-sector actors from across the  globe (e. g. the ITU Global Summit AI for Good).142  Nevertheless, governments and traditional civil  society actors continue to play, at best, a mar ginal role in developing and applying AI powered  solutions for the public good. Key bottlenecks  to the digitalization of the public sector include  entrenched legacy systems, especially at insti tutions in advanced economies like the EU, as  well as a narrow mindset that sees digitization as  a compartmentalized IT function rather than a  cross-departmental process. More often than not,  projects outsourced to large technology compa nies fail to comprehend the role of the user (i. e.  citizens), underestimate the organizational change  required for digitization, don’t have sufficient data  literacy to apply AI correctly, or are overly ambi tious in scope. Public-sector entities can no longer  outsource their responsibility to change internal  operations. But shifting the onus for this work  will require a shift in mindset as well. This means  the public sector will need to play a “multifaceted  role in the emergent ecosystem – as a client, but  also as a skilled procurer, project overseer, and an  enabler of genuine competition.”143 More than any  other sector, succeeding in this transformation will  require public-sector entities to transform their  organizational structures and increase their attrac tiveness to tech experts. In particular, processes  will need to be renewed or redesigned before  they are digitized. This requires the introduction  of human-centered service design methods, such  as design thinking, and the transition of adminis trative emphasis from the duties of citizens to the  needs of citizens.144 Unlike commercial operations,  public bodies need to serve all users, including  marginalized groups and  the “extreme  users” at  the far ends of the spectrum of product and ser vice requirements, increasing the need for effec tive AI governance mechanisms (see Chapter 3.3).  Given the ability of civil society to illuminate areas  in which AI can benefit all parts of society and  to recognize hazards that might otherwise go  overlooked, these individuals and entities bring  a crucial perspective to both the development  and the deployment stages. The civil society also 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society54society, conserve scarce resources, and allocate  them to where they are needed most in these  challenging times. To achieve this, civil society and  the public sector need to take on new roles. In  addition to being watchdogs, advocates, or service  providers, they need to better understand AI and  its positive and negative potential, particularly  with regard to the interplay of data, models and  algorithms. This requires AI-specific expertise as  well as the political will to develop both innova tive technologies and processes. It also requires  bringing in other actors that can contribute com plementary skills and tools through a platform  that connects AI experts in academia and global  platforms and strategy and policy experts in think  tanks with data analytics providers and their data  pools, as well as representatives from vulnerable  stakeholder groups who need AI-powered solu tions for social good. We suggest first focusing on  climate health or infrastructure problem sets, for  which consensus across Europe is the greatest.  Recommendations on Partnerships   (R3), (R6), (R7), (R9), (R10), (R20)Recommendation 20 – Champion AI for Public  Good. Whether in the health, climate change, edu cation or environmental protection and natural  resources or in areas underserved by the private  sector, AI can play an important role in protect ing or improving public goods. Dialogue around  AI for public good should be facilitated through  alliances between the EU, Canada and US “AI for  good” initiatives that are already flowing into the  G7 / GPAI (Global Partnership on Artificial Intelli gence) dialogue. Developing AI-based solutions  for public goods requires public sector and civil  society actors to have the capability to identify use  cases in which AI can be applied, formulate the  requirements for designing solutions (e. g. data,  computing power, last mile support, etc.), and  develop their own governance systems in order to  avoid harmful side effects. In doing so, the quan tifiable benefits of such undertakings will need to  be studied and stated clearly, lest they will be mis understood as frivolous spending in times when  recovery and stimulus funds are becoming scarce.  Quite to the contrary, AI for public good can help  bring about efficiencies across different sectors in 
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society55 Malta Greece RomaniaCzechia Cyprus SloveniaBulgariaSlovakia LatviaPortugalIrelandSweden Strong overall investments  and applications including  impactful research, possible improvements in tech  exports and digital skills. Scientiﬁcally impactful  high-potentials. Special Characters  uniquely positioned. Deﬁcient public sector  commitment, weak  research landscape and  lack of commercialization. Skilled general population  that lacks upskilling to  talent, and economically  and technologically  disadvantaged.HungaryBelgium PolandAustria Italy CroatiaGermany DenmarkFinlandNetherlands LuxembourgSpain Estonia LithuaniaFrance 0% –100% –200% –300% Below average Above average EU average200% 100% 300%CountryCluster characteristicsCluster regionCentral and  Northern Europe West European Belt Others Eastern Europe Northern and  South-East Europe CommercialisationRegion Data R&D TalentRelative deflection of EU countries to EU average in select AI priority by country clusters shows in percent how far above or below the EU average (0%) each EU country is positioned,   in respect to four selected AI priority segments (color coded)
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society56 134 Lomate and Ramachandran (2019): B2B2C: The future of  customer engagement. Infosys, in: https://www.infosys. com/about/knowledge-institute/insights/Documents/ future-customer-engagement.pdf [2 Nov 2020]. 135 Rampell (2020): On B2B2C business models. Andreessen  Horowitz, in: https://a16z.com/2018/05/17/b2b2c-businessmodels-rampell/ [2 Nov 2020]. 136 Google (n.d.). AI for Social Good, in: https://ai.google/socialgood/ [2 Nov 2020]. 137 SAP (n.d.): One Billion Lives, in: https://www.sap.com/ corporate/en/company/innovation/one-billion-lives. html [2 Nov 2020]. 138 Microsoft (n. d.): AI for accessibility, in: https://www. microsoft.com/en-us/ai/ai-for-accessibility [2 Nov 2020]. 139 Microsoft (n.d.): AI for health, in: https://www.microsoft. com/en-us/ai/ai-for-health [2 Nov 2020]. 140 Data Science for Social Good, in: https://dssg-berlin.org/  [2 Nov 2020]. 141 DataKind, in: https://www.datakind.org/ [2 Nov 2020]. 142 ITU AI for Good Global Summit, in: https://aiforgood.itu.int/  [2 Nov 2020].  143 Filer (2019): Why the ‘government’ in govtech must be more  than just a client. NS Tech, in: https://tech.newstatesman. com/guest-opinion/govtech-definition-government-client  [2 Nov 2020]. 144 Straube, Gimpel, Carrier (2017): Bürgernähe als Chance.  Public Service Lab, in: https://medium.com/public-servicelab/b%C3%BCrgern%C3%A4he-als-chance-68383480aec  [2 Nov 2020]. 145 IEEE (2020): A statement from the President, Past-President  and President-Elect of IEEE, in: https://www.ieee.org/  [2 Nov 2020]. 146 Partnership on AI (2020): Research, publications  & initiatives, in: https://www.partnershiponai.org/  [2 Nov 2020]. 147 Open AI (2020): Discovering and enacting the path to  safe artificial general intelligence, in: https://openai.com/  [2 Nov 2020].  148 Bits of Freedom (2020): About Bits of Freedom, in: https:// www.bitsoffreedom.nl/english/ [2 Nov 2020]. 149 Open Rights Group (2020): Join ORG, in: https://www. openrightsgroup.org/ [2 Nov 2020]. 150 ApTI (2020): About ApTI, in: https://www.apti.ro/apti-english  [2 Nov 2020]. 151 Chaos Computer Club (2020): Home, in: https://www.ccc. de/en/home 152 Netzpolitik (2020). Home, in: https://netzpolitik.org/  [2 Nov 2020]. 153 DFRI (2020): About DFRI, in: https://www.dfri.se/ dfri/?lang=en  [2 Nov 2020].  154 Markkula Center for Applied Ethics (2020): Voting for ethics,  in: https://www.scu.edu/ethics/  [2 Nov 2020].  155 EDRi (2020): Who we are, in: https://edri.org/about-us/whowe-are/  [2 Nov 2020]. 120 Cabinet Office (2020): Society 5.0, in: https://www8.cao. go.jp/cstp/english/society5_0/index.html [2 Nov 2020]. 121 Tse (2019): Four reasons why your business isn’t using AI.  California Review Management, in: https://www8.cao.go.jp/ cstp/english/society5_0/index.html [2 Nov 2020]. 122 The Economist (2020): A deluge of data is giving rise to a  new economy, in: https://www.economist.com/specialreport/2020/02/20/a-deluge-of-data-is-giving-rise-to-a-neweconomy [2 Nov 2020]. 123 Davenport and Ronanki (2018): Artificial Intelligence for  the real world. Harvard Business Review, in: https://hbr. org/2018/01/artificial-intelligence-for-the-real-world [2 Nov  2020]. 124 Chui, Henke, Miremadi (2019): Most of AI’s businesses uses  will be in two areas. Harvard Business Review. McKinsey  & Company, in: https://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/most-of-aisbusiness-uses-will-be-in-two-areas [2 Nov 2020]. 125 Chui, Henke, Miremadi (2019): Most of AI’s businesses uses  will be in two areas. Harvard Business Review. McKinsey  & Company, in: https://www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/most-of-aisbusiness-uses-will-be-in-two-areas [2 Nov 2020]. 126 Analysis based on data from CB Insights. 127 FIRRMA’s objective is to restrict the ability of foreign  investors to invest, even with only a minority stake, in  US businesses relevant to critical technology that relates  to national security. Relevant investments and sales  are reviewed by the Committee on Foreign Investment.  The investment risk review is extended to include noncontrolling investments in emerging and foundational  technologies that, again, relate to national security. It  seems likely that AI and robotics businesses may fall  within this latter category in individual cases. This driver  of investment in and adoption of AI could have negative  consequences in slowing down Chinese investments in  the US, or it could have a positive risk-mitigation effect on  safeguarding adoption, which remains to be seen. 128 CB Insights (2020): The 2019 Global CVC Report. 129 World Economic Forum (2015): Collaborative innovation:  Transforming business, driving growth, in: www3.weforum. org/docs/WEF_Collaborative_Innovation_report_2015.pdf  [2 Nov 2020]. 130 Bain and Company (2018): How digital tools are  transforming procurement, in: https://www.bain.com/ insights/digital-procurement-infographic/ [2 Nov 2020]. 131 In: https://www.ariba.com/resources/gartner-2019-magicquadrant-for-procure-to-pay-suites [2 Nov 2020]. 132 Nougues and Rousselle (2018): Innovative start-ups  are shaping the future of procurement. Oliver Wyman,  in: https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-expertise/ insights/2018/jul/innovative-start-ups-are-shaping-thefuture-of-procurement.html [2 Nov 2020]. 133 Fell, Kottmann, Renaudeau (2016): Insurance inside: The  new era of B2B2C insurance. Oliver Wyman, in: https:// www.oliverwyman.com/content/dam/oliver-wyman/v2/ publications/2016/nov/Oliver-Wyman-Insurance-InsideThe-New-Era-of-B2B2C-Insurance.pdf [2 Nov 2020].
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society57Export”. To preserve the interpretability of the visu alizations while accounting for various scales, each  variable has been computed to show the relative  deflection in respect to the average of all EU coun tries, and has been computed as the percentage  change to the average. Computation: (value – aver age)/average).  The segments talent, data, R&D, and  commercialization represent the mean value of the  percentage changes of the included variables to the  EU average. For the clustering of the EU countries in the  sub-chapter “ZOOM OUT: AI in EU member  states – an incoherent landscape”, the respective  countries have been clustered into categories to  create a comprehensive yet understandable over view of the status quo of the European Union. To  create meaningful insights, the data was normal ized to create comparability among values on var ious scales. All scales are positive, as they increase  with “better” values. Computation of normaliza tion: ((value – min)/(max –min)) * 100 The clusters have been created based on the  observations’ nearest means to the cluster 6. Methodology and comments     on the analysis This report includes analysis into the data collected  and the clustering techniques used in the analy sis of the countries of the EU in the sub-chapter  “ZOOM OUT: AI in EU member states – an incoher ent landscape” and throughout the report. EU coun tries are defined as official member countries of the  EU as of July 2020, i. e. without the United King dom. The dataset consists of various kinds of data:  indexes, counts, data per capita, currency, and field  weighted averages. The composed data is a mean ingful selection of a broader dataset, excluding data  types which were including missing values. The  graph “Reflective Deflection of EU Countries to EU  Average in Select AI Priority Segments by Country  Clusters” visualizes how far above or below each EU  country is positioned relative to the EU average. The  chosen priority segments are talent, data, research  and development (R&D), and commercialization.  The talent segment includes the following variables:  “Digital Skills” and “Future Work Skills”. The R&D  segment includes “Number of AI Research Publica tions per Researcher” and “H-Index”. The data seg ment includes “Internet User Density”. The commer cialization segment includes “AI Funding Density”,  “Tech Investments by Companies”, and “High Tech  
6. Methodology and Comments on the Analysis58Legal Framework Digital Businesses  Weighted average to Executive Opinion Survey on  a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World Eco nomic Forum. Response to the survey question “In  your country, how fast is the legal framework of  your country adapting to digital business mod els (e. g. e-commerce, sharing economy, fintech,  etc.)?” [1 = not fast at all; 7 = very fast] Source:  World Economic Forum, The Global Com petitiveness Report, 2019 in: http://www3.wefo rum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessRe port2019.pdf  [02 Nov 2020].  Internet User Density  Internet Users per Capita. Computation:   InternetUserDensity = InternetUsers/Population. Both population per country and count of internet  users per country provided by Internet World Stats.  Source:  Internet World Stats, Internet Usage in  European Union, 2019 in: https://www.internet worldstats.com/stats9.htm#eu  [02 Nov 2020].  Supercomputer  Count of supercomputers per country as iden tified by Top500. Minimum capacity computing  power of 1.14 petaflops required to be identi fied – that is 1.14 quadrillion floating point opera tions per second.  Source:  Top500, 2019 ( https://www.top500.org/ lists/top500/2019/11/ )  R&D Top 1000 Companies in IT  Expenses for R&D in billion USD of global 1000  publicly held companies.   Source: Strategy&, The Global Innovation  1000 study, 2018. in: https://www.strategyand. pwc.com/gx/en/insights/innovation1000.html   [02 Nov 2020].  AI Researcher Density  AI researchers per Capita. Computation   AIResearcherDensity = AIResearchers/Population. AI researcher defined as an individual who pre sented at a selection of 21 AI conferences in  2018. Total number of individuals accounted for  is 22,400 as provided by Gagne, J in 2019. Popu lation provided from Internet World Stats, 2019.  Sources:  Gagne, J, Global AI Talent Report, 2019  in: https://jfgagne.ai/talent-2019/  [02 Nov 2020],  Internet World Stats, 2019 in: https://www.inter networldstats.com/stats9.htm#eu  [02 Nov 2020]. centers, a methodology called k-means cluster ing, a method of vector quantization. To interpret  the clusters, the observations have been reduced  in dimensions into arising principal components.  To derive the characteristics of each cluster, the  variable vectors contributing to the principal com ponents have been mapped. Subsequently, the  impact that each variable vector brings onto the  principal component can be identified. This report includes further graphs. These graphs  show the total, unprocessed value of each metric  respective to a country, as defined below. 6.1 Definition and sources  For this report, only publicly available, secondary  data was collected. ICT Regulation  Composite index on a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max)  based on the ICT Regulatory Tracker by the Inter national Telecommunications Union. Standard ized on 0-2.  Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] based on data pro vided by International Telecommunication Union  (ITU), ICT Regulatory Tracker, 2018 in: https:// www.itu.int/net4/itu-d/irt/#/tracker-by-country/ regulatory-tracker/2018  [02 Nov 2020]. Cybersecurity  Composite index on a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max)  based on the Global Security Index (GCI) by the  International Telecommunications Unions. Stand ardized on 0-1.  Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] based on data pro vided by International Telecommunications Union  (ITU), Global Cybersecurity Index, 2018 in: https:// www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-d/opb/str/D-STRGCI.012018-PDF-E.pdf  [02 Nov 2020].
6. Methodology and Comments on the Analysis59ulation possess sufficient digital skills (e. g. com puter skills, basic coding, digital reading)?” [1 = not  all; 7 = to a great extent] Source:  World Economic Forum, The Global Com petitiveness Report, 2019 in: ( http://www3.wefo rum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessRe port2019.pdf  [02 Nov 2020].  Future Work Skills  Weighted average to the Executive Opinion Survey  on a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World  Economic Forum. Response to the survey ques tion “In your country, how do you assess the style  of teaching?” [1 = frontal, teacher based, and  focused on memorizing; 7 = encourages creative  and critical individual thinking] Source:  World Economic Forum, The Global Com petitiveness Report, 2019 in: http://www3.wefo rum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessRe port2019.pdf  [02 Nov 2020].  AI Professional Density AI professionals per capita. Computation:   AIProfessionalDensity =  AIProfessional/Population. AI professional defined as a self-identified profes sional individual, holding a PhD with the self-de scribed job title “data scientist”, “research sci entist”, ”machine learning engineer”, ”machine  learning researcher” and “data analyst” on the  global professional network LinkedIn. Total num ber of individuals accounted for is 36,524 as pro vided by Gagne, J in 2019. Population provided  from Internet World Stats, 2019.   Sources:  Gagne, J, Global AI Talent Report, 2019  in: https://jfgagne.ai/talent-2019/  [02 Nov 2020],  Internet World Stats, 2019 in: https://www.inter networldstats.com/stats9.htm#eu  [02 Nov 2020].  AI Funding Density USD in funding for all private AI start-ups from  2016 to 2020 per capita. Computation AIFund ingDensity = Sumo f funding from2016to2020/Pop ulation  . AI start-ups as identified by CB Insights  across market sectors and industries. Only closed  funding for private companies, no debt or loans  and no government funding.   Source:  CB Insights, The 2019 Global CVC Report,  2019 in: https://www.cbinsights.com/research/ report/corporate-venture-capital-trends-2019/   [02 Nov 2020].Number of AI Research Papers  Number of research papers as listed in the  SCOPUS database hosted by Elsevier and pro vided in the SCImago Journal & Country Rank.  Sum of publications categorized within the sub ject of “Artificial Intelligence” across 1966 to 2018.  Source:  SCImago Journal Rank, 2018 in: https:// www.scimagojr.com/countryrank.php?cate gory=1702  [02 Nov 2020].  Number of AI Research   Publications per Researcher  Number of AI Research Publications (see 6.1.8.)  per AI researchers. Computation: No. AIResearch PublicationsperResearcher = No. of AIResearch Publications/No. of AIResearcher.  AI researcher  defined as an individual who presented at an AI  conference in 2018. Total number of individuals  accounted for is 5,400 as provided by Gagne, J  in 2019.  Source:  SCImago Journal Rank, 2018 in: https:// www.scimagojr.com/countryrank.php?cate gory=1702)  [02 Nov 2020]. Gagne, J, Global AI  Talent Report, 2019 in: ( https://jfgagne.ai/tal ent-2019/  [02 Nov 2020].  H-Index  Index describing the equilibria of the number of  citations of an author’s publications correspond ing to an author’s single publications number of  citations as provided by SCImago Journal based  on publications across 1966 to 2018.  Source:  SCImago Journal Rank, 2018 ( https://www. scimagojr.com/countryrank.php?category=1702 )   Citation Impact Field weighted citation impact calculated by com paring the number of received citations actually to  the number of expected citations for a publication  of the same type, publication year, and subject as  provided in the SCImago Journal.   Source:  SCImago Journal Rank, 2018 in: https:// www.scimagojr.com/countryrank.php?cate gory=1702  [02 Nov 2020].  Digital Skills   Weighted average to Executive Opinion Survey on  a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World Eco nomic Forum. Response to the survey question “In  your country, to what extent does the active pop -
5. Driving forces for the uptake of AI in the economy and society60Robot Density   Number of robots in operation per 10,000  employees in the manufacturing industry.  Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: ( https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] based on data pro vided by the International Federation of Robotics  in: IFR, https://ifr.org  [02 Nov 2020]. Missing val ues were sourced from the International Labour  Organization, ILOSTAT in: https://ilostat.ilo.org/   [02 Nov 2020]. Government Procurement of   Advanced Tech in 2019.   Weighted average to the Executive Opinion Survey  on a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World  Economic Forum. Response to the survey ques tion: “In your country, to what extent do govern ment purchasing decisions foster innovation?” [1  = not at all; 7 = to a great extent] Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] on data provided  by the World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion  Survey 2016–2017 in: http://reports.weforum.org   [02 Nov 2020]. ICT Use and Efficiency  Weighted average to the Executive Opinion Survey  on a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World  Economic Forum. Response to the survey ques tion: “In your country, to what extent does the use  of ICTs by the government improve the quality of  government services to the population?” [1 = not  at all; 7 = to a great extent] Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 ( https://networkreadi nessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-ver sion-March-2020.pdf ) on data provided by the  World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Sur vey 2016–2017 in: http://reports.weforum.org   [02 Nov 2020].Tech Investments by Companies Weighted average to Executive Opinion Survey on  a scale of 0 (min) to 100 (max) by the World Eco nomic Forum. Response to the survey question:  “In your country, to what extent do companies  invest in emerging technologies (e. g. Internet of  Things, advanced analytics and artificial intelli gence, augmented virtual reality and wearables,  advanced robotics, 3D printing)?” [1 = not at all;  7 = to a great extent] Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] on data provided  by the World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion  Survey 2016–2017 in: http://reports.weforum.org   [02 Nov 2020]. High Tech Export  High technology manufacturing exports as a per cent of total manufactured goods in 2018.   Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 in: https://networkread inessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-versionMarch-2020.pdf  [02 Nov 2020] on data provided  by World Bank, World Development Indicators in:  http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/worldde velopment-indicators  [02 Nov 2020]. Software Spending Total computer software spending as a percent of  GDP in 2018.  Source:  Portulans Institute, World Information  Technology and Services Alliance; The Network  Readiness Index, 2019 ( https://networkreadi nessindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/ The-Network-Readiness-Index-2019-New-ver sion-March-2020.pdf ) on data provided by the IHS  Markit, Information and Communication Technol ogy Database in: https://www.ihs.com/index.html   [02 Nov 2020], sourced from INSEAD, Cornell Uni versity, and World Intellectual Property Organiza tion, The Global Innovation Index 2019 in: https:// www.globalinnovationindex.org  [02 Nov 2020].
Jason Chumtong Advisor for Artificial Intelligence  Klingelhöfer Strasse 23  10785 Berlin T +49 30 / 269 96-3989Imprint Editor   Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung e. V. 2020, Berlin Authors Olaf Groth, Founder and Managing Partner of Cambrian Group   Tobias Straube, Principal at Cambrian Group Cambrian Futures LLC, Eunice Street, Berkeley CA-94708-1644, United States   https://cambrian.ai, Twitter: @AICambrian Editorial team and contact at the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung e. V. Sebastian Weise Advisor for Global Innovation Policy Klingelhöfer Strasse 23  10785 Berlin T +49 30 / 269 96-3732 Cover image: © NASA Earth Observatory images by Joshua Stevens, using Suomi NPP  VIIRS data from Miguel Román, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center; Kirsty Pargeter/ Vecteezy.com Images: © S. 7 © iStock by jamesteohart/getty images; Alexrk2/Wikimedia Commons,  S. 22 © iStock by DKosig/getty images; Alexrk2/Wikimedia Commons, S.30 © iStock by  piranka/getty images; Alexrk2/Wikimedia Commons, S. 41 © Quardia/shutterstock;  Alexrk2/Wikimedia Commons, S. 49 © DamienArt/shutterstock; Alexrk2/Wikimedia  Commons,  S. 57 © your123/Adobe Stock; Alexrk2/Wikimedia Commons Design and typesetting: yellow too Pasiek Horntrich GbR The text of this publication is licenced under the terms of “Creative Commons   Attribution-Share Alike 4.0 International”, CC BY-SA 4.0 (available at:   https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ ) legalcode.de). ISBN 978-3-95721-807-0
Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung e. V.In 2017, Finland was the first European country to  present its own artificial intelligence (AI) strategy. Since  then, a total of 22 countries and the EU itself have done  so. The direction of travel is clear: Europe wants to use  the economic and societal potential of AI, and to become  an AI-leader internationally. In consideration of this  ambition, this study analyses in detail the European AI  innovation ecosystem and develops recommendations  for action to strengthen it.  
