JULY 2020 The value of algorithms Government agencies use data to help inform, improve  and deliver the services provided to people in New Zealand  every day. Simple algorithms can be used to standardise  business processes to ensure scarce resources are distributed  equitably. More complex algorithms can be used to distil  information from large or complex data sets to support  human decision-making and reveal insights that could not  easily be revealed by human analysis alone. These algorithms can be used to help government better  understand New Zealand and New Zealanders. This  knowledge helps government make good decisions and  deliver services that are more effective and efficient. The use  of algorithms can mitigate the risk that human biases will  enter into the administration of government services and  result in real benefits for everyone. However, the opportunities also bring fresh challenges.  For example, human bias could be perpetuated, or even  amplified by, algorithms that are not designed and operated  in thoughtful ways. Transparency and accountability are  critical to ensuring that the public can trust and support the  government to use these tools in appropriate ways.  This Charter is a commitment by government agencies   to carefully manage how algorithms will be used to strike   the right balance between privacy and transparency,  prevent unintended bias and reflect the principles of the  Treaty of Waitangi. Definitions There are a wide range of advanced analytical tools that  can fit under the term ‘algorithm’. These range from less  advanced techniques such as regression models and  decision trees, which primarily support predictions and  streamline business processes, through to more complex  systems, such as neural networks and Bayesian models,  which can take on properties of machine learning as they  make advanced calculations and predictions. A good discussion of the different types of predictive  algorithms and the challenges of defining these is contained  in ‘Government Use of Artificial Intelligence in New Zealand’  (New Zealand Law Foundation and Otago University, 2019).ALGORITHM CHARTER FOR  AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND The risks and benefits associated with algorithms are largely  unrelated to the types of algorithms being used. Very simple  algorithms could result in just as much benefit (or harm) as  the most complex algorithms depending on the content,  focus and intended recipients of the business processes  at hand. As a consequence, this Charter does not specify  a technical definition of an algorithm. It instead commits  signatories to take a particular focus on those algorithms  that have a high risk of unintended consequences and/or  have a significant impact if things do go wrong, particularly  for vulnerable communities. Review The Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand is an  evolving piece of work that needs to respond to emerging  technologies and also be fit-for-purpose for government  agencies. After twelve months a review of the Algorithm  Charter will be conducted, to ensure it is achieving its  intended purpose of improving government transparency  and accountability without stifling innovation or causing  undue compliance burden. Foundations The Algorithm Charter is part of a wider ecosystem and  works together with existing tools, networks and research,  including: Principles for the Safe and Effective Use of Data and Analytics   (Privacy Commissioner and Government Chief Data  Steward, 2018) Government Use of Artificial Intelligence in New Zealand   (New Zealand Law Foundation and Otago University, 2019) Trustworthy AI in Aotearoa – AI Principles (AI Forum   New Zealand, 2020) Open Government Partnership , an international agreement  to increase transparency Data Protection and Use Policy (Social Wellbeing Agency,  2020) Privacy, Human Rights and Ethics Framework (Ministry of  Social Development).
Probable Likely to occur often during standard operations Occasional Likely to occur some time during standard operations Improbable Unlikely but possible to occur during standard operations Impact Low The impact of these  decisions is isolated and/or  their severity is not serious.Moderate The impact of these  decisions reaches a  moderate amount of people  and/or their severity is  moderate.High The impact of these  decisions is widespread  and/or their severity is  serious. JULY 2020 Assessing likelihood and impact The Algorithm Assessment Report found that advanced  analytics and data use are an essential part of delivering  public services. Applying the Charter to every business rule  and process would be impossible for agencies to comply  with and not achieve the intended benefits of the Charter. However, where algorithms are being employed by  government agencies in a way that can significantly impact  on the wellbeing of people, or there is a high likelihood  Likelihoodmany people will suffer an unintended adverse impact, it is  appropriate to apply the Charter. Charter signatories will make an assessment of their  algorithm decisions using the risk matrix below. This  supports their evaluation, by quantifying the likelihood of  an unintended adverse outcome against its relative level of  impact to derive an overall level of risk. The risk rating determines the application of the Charter. Risk matrix Application and Commitment The Charter will apply differently to each signatory. The  risk matrix approach means that signatories can focus  first on decisions that have a high risk and exclude most  of the many business rules that government agencies  use every day to give effect to legislative requirements and for business as usual activities. The intention is to  focus on those uses of algorithms that have a high or  critical risk of unintended harms for New Zealanders.  This commitment will be reviewed in twelve months as  part of the scope review.Risk rating Low  The Algorithm Charter could be applied.  Moderate The Algorithm Charter should be applied. High  The Algorithm Charter must be applied. 
This Charter demonstrates a commitment to ensuring New Zealanders have confidence in how government  agencies use algorithms. This Charter is one of many ways that government is demonstrating transparency  and accountability in the use of data. However, it cannot fully address important considerations, such as  Māori Data Sovereignty, as these are complex and require separate consideration. Commitment: Our organisation understands that decisions made using algorithms impact people in New Zealand. We  commit to making an assessment of the impact of decisions informed by our algorithms. We further commit  to applying the Algorithm Charter commitments as guided by the identified risk rating. Algorithm Charter Commitments: TRANSPARENCY Maintain transparency by clearly explaining how decisions are informed by algorithms. This may include: ›› Plain English documentation of the algorithm, ›› Making information about the data and processes available (unless a lawful restriction prevents this), ›› Publishing information about how data are collected, secured and stored. PARTNERSHIP • Deliver clear public benefit through Treaty commitments by: ›› Embedding a Te Ao Māori perspective in the development and use of algorithms consistent with the  principles of the Treaty of Waitangi. PEOPLE • Focus on people by: ›› Identifying and actively engaging with people, communities and groups who have an interest in  algorithms, and consulting with those impacted by their use. DATA • Make sure data is fit for purpose by: ›› Understanding its limitations, ›› Identifying and managing bias. PRIVACY, ETHICS AND HUMAN RIGHTS • Ensure that privacy, ethics and human rights are safeguarded by: ›› Regularly peer reviewing algorithms to assess for unintended consequences and act on this information. HUMAN OVERSIGHT • Retain human oversight by: ›› Nominating a point of contact for public inquiries about algorithms, ›› Providing a channel for challenging or appealing of decisions informed by algorithms, ›› Clearly explaining the role of humans in decisions informed by algorithms.JULY 2020 ALGORITHM CHARTER   FOR AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND Chief Executive: Chief Privacy Officer: Senior Manager responsible for algorithms: Organisation:   Date:  Signed
