	   	  ACM	  US	  Public	  Policy	  Council	  1701	  Pennsylvania	  Ave	  NW,	  Suite	  200	  	  Washington,	  DC	  	  20006	  	  	  +1	  202.580.6555	  	  acmpo@acm.org	  	  usacm.acm.org	  	  	  	  	  	  POLICY	  STATEMENT	  ON	  MANDATORY	  ENGINEERED	  LAW	  ENFORCEMENT	  ACCESS	  TO	  INFORMATION	  INFRASTRUCTURE	  AND	  DEVICES	  	  The	  power	  and	  prevalence	  of	  systems	  and	  devices	  that	  encrypt	  data	  have	  increased	  dramatically	  in	  recent	  years,	  affording	  the	  users	  of	  such	  systems	  and	  devices	  virtually	  complete	  control	  over	  access	  to	  encrypted	  data.	  In	  response,	  some	  in	  Congress,	  the	  Executive	  Branch	  and	  the	  law	  enforcement	  community	  have	  called	  for	  the	  designers	  and	  providers	  of	  such	  robust	  encryption	  technology	  to	  ensure	  data	  are	  accessible	  to	  law	  enforcement.	  	  	  Specifically,	  it	  has	  been	  suggested	  that	  the	  designers	  of	  such	  encryption	  systems,	  and	  the	  commercial	  and	  other	  institutions	  that	  employ	  them,	  should	  create	  or	  be	  legally	  compelled	  to	  create	  extraordinary	  means	  of	  access	  to	  them	  that	  would	  override	  or	  circumvent	  passwords	  and	  other	  user	  controls.	  Such	  engineered	  “backdoors”	  and	  other	  means	  of	  extraordinary	  access	  would	  be	  employed	  as	  judicially	  authorized	  under	  appropriate	  circumstances	  to	  permit	  law	  enforcement	  access	  to	  information	  on	  communications	  networks,	  or	  stored	  in	  personal	  and	  commercial	  digital	  devices.	  	  	  USACM	  is	  committed	  to	  providing	  technical	  information	  to	  policymakers,	  all	  interested	  communities	  and	  the	  public	  in	  the	  service	  of	  sound	  public	  policy	  formation	  on	  this	  important	  matter.	  The	  points	  below	  represent	  USACM’s	  collective	  view	  of	  current	  scientific	  understandings	  and	  will	  be	  revisited	  and/or	  republished	  as	  significant	  technical	  developments	  warrant.	  With	  respect	  to	  mandated	  extraordinary	  access	  to	  user-­‐controlled	  encryption	  systems,	  USACM	  finds:	  	  •  No	  practical	  or	  theoretical	  engineering	  solutions	  of	  which	  we	  are	  aware	  have	  emerged	  to	  date	  that	  would	  provide	  law	  enforcement	  access	  to	  encrypted	  information	  solely	  under	  the	  control	  of	  the	  user	  of	  a	  robust	  encryption	  system.	  •  All	  presently	  known	  means	  of	  engineering	  extraordinary	  access	  to	  encrypted	  user	  information	  necessarily	  would	  introduce	  security	  vulnerabilities	  that	  would	  expose	  the	  involved	  systems	  to	  attack	  by	  malicious	  or	  otherwise	  extra-­‐legal	  actors.	  •  Any	  proposed	  future	  technological	  means	  of	  affording	  extraordinary	  access	  to	  encrypted	  systems	  should	  be	  subjected	  to	  rigorous	  analysis	  and	  detailed	  Congressional	  consideration	  of	  all	  risks	  and	  benefits,	  including	  the	  potential	  access	  such	  a	  mechanism	  would	  provide	  to	  entities	  beyond	  the	  US,	  before	  being	  implemented.	  •  Effective	  judicial	  and	  congressional	  oversight	  of	  any	  extraordinary	  access	  techniques	  ultimately	  employed	  will	  require	  the	  mandated	  use	  of	  state-­‐of-­‐the-­‐art	  audit	  trail	  and	  other	  tamper-­‐resistant	  verification	  technologies.	  	  •  Additional	  research	  into	  means	  of	  providing	  extraordinary	  access	  to	  encryption	  systems	  for	  law	  enforcement	  purposes,	  and	  the	  risks	  and	  benefits	  potentially	  associated	  with	  them,	  is	  needed	  to	  make	  informed	  policy	  on	  this	  topic.	  A	  public	  process	  to	  develop	  and	  evaluate	  such	  technology	  would	  be	  most	  appropriate	  to	  materially	  advance	  knowledge	  in	  this	  area.	  	  	  April	  12,	  2018	   
