OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers No. 266 Opportunities and drawbacks of using artificial intelligence for trainingAnnelore Verhagen https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/22729bd6-en
         Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development   DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   Unclassified  English text only   7 December 2021   DIRECTORATE FOR EMPLOYMENT, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS   EMPLOYMENT, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                       Opportunities and Drawbacks of Using Artificial Intelligence for Training              OECD SOCIAL, EMPLOYMENT AND MIGRATION WORKING PAPERS No. 266      JEL classification: I20, J24, M53, O15, O33.                 Authorised for publication by Stefano Scarpetta, Director, Directorate for Employment, Labour and  Social Affairs .    All Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers are now available through the OECD website at  www.oecd.org/els/workingpapers .     Annelore VERHAGEN: annelore.verhagen@oecd.org          JT03487096   OFDE     This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any te rritory, to the  delimitation of i nternational frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.  
2  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers   www.oecd.org/els/workingpapers      OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its  member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are those of the authors.   Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progre ss by the author(s) and are published to  stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD works. Comments on Working Papers  are welcomed, and may be sent to els.contact@oecd.org .  This series is d esigned to make available to a wider readership selected labour market, social policy and  migration studies prepared for use within the OECD. Authorship is usually collective, but principal writers  are named. The papers are generally available only in thei r original language – English or French – with a  summary in the other.   This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any  territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city  or area.   The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities.  The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusa lem  and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.   1 Note by Turkey: The information in this document with reference to “Cyprus” relates to the southern part  of the Island. There is no single authority representing both Tur kish and Greek Cypriot people on the Island.  Turkey recognises the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC). Until a lasting and equitable solution  is found within the context of the United Nations, Turkey shall preserve its position concerning the “Cypr us  issue”.   Note by all the European Union Member States of the OECD and the European Union: The Republic of  Cyprus is recognised by all members of the United Nations with the exception of Turkey. The information  in this document relates to the area under t he effective control of the Government of the Republic of  Cyprus. The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli  authorities. The use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the G olan Heights, East  Jerusalem and Israeli settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law.      © OECD 2021   You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from  OECD publications, databases and mult imedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs,  websites and teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright  owner is given. All requests for commercial use and translation rights should be submitted t o  rights@oecd.org .   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   3  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Acknowledgements   This publication contributes to the OECD’s Artificial Intelligence in Work, Innovation, Productivity and Skills  (AI-WIPS) programme, which provides policymakers with new evidence and analysis to keep abreast of  the fast -evolving changes in AI capabilities and diffusion and their implications for the world of work. The  programme aims to help ensure that adoption of AI in the world of work is effec tive, beneficial to all,  people -centred and accepted by the population at large. AI -WIPS is supported by the German Federal  Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (BMAS) and will complement the work of the German AI Observatory  in the Ministry’s Policy Lab Digital, Work & Society. For more in formation, visit https://oecd.ai/work innovation -productivity -skills  and https://denkfabrik -bmas.de/ .    This report would not have been possible  without the  input from  experts on AI and AI for training, including  developers of AI tools for training, employers, trade unions, academics, officials and education institutions.   Many thanks to the participants of the roundtable and panel discussions and follow -up interviews for their  time and valuable insights: David Barnes (IBM corporation), Tibor Borbely -Pecze (Hungarian Ministry for  Education and Technology), Anna Byhovskaya ( Trade Union Advisory Committee to the OECD ), Justine  Cassell ( Paris Artificia l Intelligence Research Institute ), Giovana Chimant ão Punhagui (Sistema Fiep),  Florian Dautil (Bayes Impact), Arthur Fioravente Chiba (SkillLab), Marie Christine Fregin (Research Center  for Education and the Labour Market), Frank Gaiser (Dutch Ministry of Defence), Soon Joo Gog  (SkillsFuture Singapore), Stephan Heuke (German Federal Employment Agency), Martina Hofmann  (German Federal Employment Agency), Rita Kirkliauskin ė (Lithuanian Employment Service), Rose Luckin  (University College London), Tim Majchrza k (University of Agder), Sophie Thompson (VirtualSpeech),  Armand Vincentie (Dutch Ministry of Defence) and Tamsin Vine (Sodexo) .   Special thanks go to Glenda Quintini (Skills Team Manager) for her guidance and support throughout the  project. The work was c arried out under the supervision of Mark Keese (Head of the Skills and  Employability Division). The report also benefitted from helpful comments provided by colleagues from the  Directorate for Employment, Labour and Social Affairs (Stijn Broecke, Marguerit a Lane, Angelica Salvi Del  Pero and Morgan Williams), from the Centre for Skills (Marieke Vandeweyer), from the Directorate for  Education and Skills (Andreas Schleicher, Reyer van der Vlies and Stephan  Vincent -Lancrin) and from the  Directorate for Science,  Technology and Innovation (Sarah Box and Karine Perset). 
4  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Abstract   Technological developments are one of the major forces behind the need  for retraining, but they can also be part of the solution. In particular, Artificial  Intelligence  (AI) has the potential to increase training participation, including  among currently underrepresented groups, by lowering some of the barriers  to training that people experience and by increasing motivation  to train .  Moreover, certain AI solutions for training may improve the alignment of  training to labour market needs, and reduce bias and discrimination in the  workplace. In order to realise the benefits of AI for training and ensur e that  it yields benefits  for all, it will be necessary to address potential dra wbacks   in terms of changing  skills  requirements , inequalities in access to data,  technology and infrastructure and important ethical issues . Finally, even  when these drawbacks can be addressed, the introduction and expansion  of AI tools for training is con strained by the supply of AI skills in the  workforce and the availability of scientific evidence regarding the benefits of  AI tools for training and whether they are cost -effective.    
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   5  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Synthèse   Les développements technologiques sont l'une des principales fo rces à  l'origine du besoin de reconversion professionnelle, mais ils peuvent  également faire partie de la solution. En particulier, l'intelligence artificielle  (IA) a le potentiel d'augmenter la participation à la formation, y compris  parmi les groupes act uellement sous -représentés, en réduisant certains  des obstacles à la formation que les gens rencontrent et en augmentant la  motivation à se former. En outre, certaines solutions d'IA pour la formation  peuvent améliorer l'alignement de la formation sur les besoins du marché  du travail, et réduire les préjugés et la discrimination sur le lieu de travail.   Afin de réaliser les avantages de l'IA pour la formation et de s'assurer  qu'elle apporte des bénéfices pour tous, il sera nécessaire de surmonter  les  défis potentiels en termes d 'évoluti on des compétences requises,  d’inégalités d'accès aux données, aux technologies et aux infrastructures,  ainsi que d'importantes questions éthiques. Enfin, même si ces  inconvénients peuvent être résolus, l'introduction et l'exp ansion des outils  d'IA pour la formation sont limitées par l'offre de compét ences en IA et la  disponibilité d’evidences  scientifiques concernant les retours des outils d'IA  pour la formation et leur rentabilité.    
6  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Kurzfassung   Die technologischen Entwicklung en sind eine der Hauptursachen für d ie  Notwendigkeit zur Weiterbildung , sie können aber auch Teil der Lösung  sein. Insbesondere künstliche Intelligenz (KI) hat das Potenzial, die  Weiter bildungsbeteiligung zu erhöhen, auch bei derzeit  unterrepräsentierten G ruppen, indem sie einige der Hindernisse abbaut, mit  denen die Menschen konfrontiert sind, und die Motivation zur Weiter bildung  erhöht. Darüber hinaus können einige KI -Lösungen die Anpassung der  Weiter bildung an die Bedürfnisse des Arbeitsmarktes verbesser n und  Vorurteile und Diskriminierung am Arbeitsplatz verringern. Um die Vorteile  der KI für die Weiter bildung zu nutzen und sicherzustellen, dass der Einsatz  von KI zu Ergebnissen führt, von denen beide Seiten profitieren, müssen  jedoch die Herausforderung en in Bezug auf digitale Fähigkeiten, Zugang zu  Daten , Technologie und Infrastruktur, sowie zu ethischen Fragen  bewältigt  werden.   Zusätzlich  wird die Einführung und Ausweitung von KI -Tools für  die Weiterbildung durch die noch geringen KI -Fähigkeiten in de r  Bevölkerung und die limitierte Verfügbarkeit wissenschaftlicher  Erkenntnisse über den Nutzen von KI -Tools für die Weiterbildung und ihre  Kosteneffizienz eingeschränkt.    
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   7  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Table of contents   OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers  2  Acknowledgements  3  Synthèse  5  Kurzfassung  6  Executive Summary  9  Résumé  13  Zusammenfassung  18  Glossary  23  1. Introduction  24  2. How AI can be used for adult education and training  26  2.1. Planning: using AI to assess skill demand and supply, and map training provision  27  2.2. Matching: using AI to map available training courses into skill units  30  2.3. Training content and assessment: using AI to tailor content and adapt it to the user’s  progress  31  2.4. Training delivery : innovative delivery channels powered by AI  33  3. How using AI for training may improve adult learning systems  35  3.1. Increasing training participation  36  3.2. Improving the inclusiveness of adult learning systems  46  3.3. Improving the alignment of training participation  to labour market needs  50  3.4. Reducing bias and discrimination in the workplace  52  4. Potential drawbacks of using AI for training and how they can be addressed  54  4.1. Decreasing the inclusiveness of adult learning sy stems  55  4.2. Changing skill requirements in jobs related to training and recruitment  57  4.3. Raising ethical issues  58  4.4. Barriers to the introduction and expansion of AI tools for training  59 
8  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  5. Conclusion  63  References  64    Figures   Figure  2.1. The adult learning process: where and how AI may help  27  Figure  2.2. Relative international demand for Machine Learning skills  28  Figure  2.3. An avatar may help enhance workers’ feelings of engagement with the bot  34  Figure  3.1. AI’s potential to improve adult learning syste ms 36  Figure  3.2. Adults' participation in learning activities  37  Figure  3.3. Barriers to participation in adult learning  37  Figure  3.4. AI automatically provides objective feedback during VR soft sk ills training  39  Figure  3.5. AI mimics real fire behaviour during VR fire training  40  Figure  3.6. Participation of enterprises in the provision of adult learning  43  Figure  3.7. The AI system behind Bob provides the probability of a wage increase by participating in training  45  Figure  3.8. Adults' participation in learning activities, by subgroups  46  Figure  3.9. AI provides suggestions for skills related to activities outside of work  48  Figure  3.10. AI automatically captions sounds, their identity and their direction  50  Figure  3.11. AI can transform curricula and vacancies into  measures of skill needs  51  Figure  3.12. AI -powered VR empathy training creates a full -body illusion with the aim to enhance empathy  53  Figure  4.1. The share of adults with low digital skills  55  Figure  4.2. Share of enterprises using AI, by size  57  Figure  4.3. Relative international demand for Artificial Intelligence skills  60  Figure  4.4. Top 30 skills demanded in AI -related jobs  61    Boxes   Box 2.1. Using AI to assess occupational prospects: Bakhshi et al.  29  Box 2.2. Using AI to infer skills from job titles: Clustree  30  Box 2.3. Using AI to provide tailored training recommendations: Boostrs  31  Box 2.4. Using AI to provide suggestions for training content: eDoer  32  Box 2.5. Using AI for adaptive language training: Duolingo  33  Box 2.6. Using AI for informal learning: Bob the Bot  34  Box 3.1. Using AI for soft skills XR training: VirtualSpeech  39  Box 3.2. Using AI in XR training to eliminate physical risks: FLAIM  40  Box 3.3. Using AI for assessment: Iris  42  Box 3.4. Using AI to raise asp irations: Bob  45  Box 3.5. Using AI to build skill profiles: SkillLab  48  Box 3.6. Using AI to empower deaf and hard of hearing people: HoloSound  50  Box 3.7. Using AI to assess and anticipate skill needs: Headai  51  Box 3.8. Using AI in diversity and inclusion XR trai ning: Equal Reality  53   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   9  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Executive Summary   The adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the workplace is one of the major forces behind the need for  retraining but it might also be part of the solution. Notably, AI has the potential to improve  the targeting of  and access to adult learning system s. This is necessary, because the way we work is changing rapidly,  and yet only four in ten adults across the OECD participate in education and training in any given year,  and these numbers are even lower for vulnerable groups on the labour market (OECD, 2019 [1]). Moreover,  training quality remains an issue, and aligning training to labour market needs and individuals’ career goals  can be challenging. Other technologies , such as video -conferencing tools, internet -based platforms or  matching algorithms,  have been leveraged in the past to deliver training, to spread information on skill  requirements and relevant training courses or to match jobseekers to available learning opportunities. AI  has the potential to  improve sig nificantly on these other technologies and, in some cases, it can enhance  or replace human intervention for adults with relatively simple information and training needs.        Drawing on a review of the literature and insights provided by various experts i n the fields of AI and training,  this working paper shed s light on the potential opportunities and drawbacks of using AI for training , yielding   valuable m essages for policymakers, public and private employment services and firms that are  considering introd ucing AI tools in the training they offer.   Using AI for training has the potential to increase training participation, including among currently  underrepresented groups, by lowering some of the barriers to training that people experience and  increasing training motivation. Moreover, certain AI solutions for training may improve the alignment of  training to labour market needs, and reduce bias and discrimination in the workplace. Nevertheless, the  potential benefits of AI tools for training notwithstanding, there are also important potential drawbacks of  using AI for training, such as the risk of decreasing the inclusiveness of adult learning systems due to the  digital skills that are needed to use the tools, and the large amounts of data and high -quality technological  infrastructure needed to  develop AI tools . Using AI for training may also  lead to significant changes in  skill  requirements in jobs related to training and recruitment , generating resistance and negative emplo yment  effects for the professionals involved . Moreover, AI brings about important ethical issues. Realising AI’s  full potential  and ensuring that using AI for training has beneficial outcomes for all requires  more research  and policies that address  the nee d for digital  skills, the costs of adoption, and the development of  trustworthy, human -centred explainable AI tools for training .   Opportunities of using AI for training    AI has the potential to help address some of the key barriers to training participatio n, notably those  related to time constraints . AI-based  content and assessment may significantly shorten the  learning process , because it allow s learners  to skip irrelevant training tasks or entire  modules, and  only focus on filling their knowledge and skil l gaps.  Since AI can tailor training to  millions of students  at the same time , it can do so at a significantly smaller cost than private tutors . Compared to non -AI  online courses where there is no live interaction between students and instructors (e.g. Massive  Open Online Courses),  AI may add value by making sessions  more tailored to the individual needs  
10  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  and interactive, for instance by incorporating  chatbot functions . Also, t hanks to AI -powered  augmented and virtual reality technologies  (AR and VR) , the advantages of distance learning can  be extended to practice -oriented  training.    AI can enable personalised education at scale . AI allows developing training that is adapted to  specific reskilling needs, at a significantly smaller cost than private tutorin g. As discussed above,  the advantages can be multiple. Personalisation can be translated into time savings for some  trainees while also helping vulnerable populations that need more time to learn. AI -driven  personalisation is scalable at little cost as it does not require additional classrooms, teachers or  tailored curricula. This scalability has the potential to benefit employers, training providers and  policy makers.    AI can help people find training programmes  that are most relevant to their needs  quickly  and  easily, which, in turn may  increase individuals’ motivation to participate in training . Many  governments are currently scaling up the provision of career guidance and advice by leveraging  internet -based platforms that spread information on skill requi rements by occupation, emerging  skill shortages and available training opportunities. AI can help improve these online career  guidance activities by mimicking career counsellors’ prompts and interactions to achieve a better  assessment of the user’s needs a nd produce tailored recommendations. Tailored training  recommendations, as well as AI -based assessments that are tailored to the learners’ entry level  and progress may also increase training  relevance and reduce training drop -outs. Finally, using AI  for training may increase motivation to train , particularly as  compared to non -AI online training, by  expanding the provision of practice -oriented  training through AR and VR , which often include  playful elements, and by providing instant feedback to the learner.    Vulnerable groups  – such as the low -skilled, disabled  or non-native speakers – are significantly  under -represented in training. Using AI for training may be particularly attractive for them. The  practice -oriented  component of AR and VR may be more motivat ing for adults who have become  disengaged with classroom -based education and for adults who have trouble understandin g written   materials  and instructions  (e.g. non -native speakers or people with low literacy skills) . The focus of  AR and VR on learning from  mistakes in a safe environment  may motivate  people who suffer from  fear of failure to participate in training. Moreover, AI -powered text -to-speech and speech -to-text  technology facilitates the captioning or reading aloud of any spoken or written communica tion in  real-time, as well as its translation in any language. This can broaden access to training for the  visually or hearing impaired.    Employers  also stand to benefit  from the provision of training through AI. AR and VR  can be  interesting for employers,  due to their time and place flexibility, but also for the potential savings in  raw materials and the avoidance of physical injuries relative to in -person  training. Finally, AI may  help make training participation more efficient  by improving the matching between learning  outcomes of training and the skill gaps of individuals     AI may help make training more impactful  by enabling a better alignment of training to skill needs,   by enhancing human career and training advisors’ skill a ssessment and training suggestions, and  by guiding and empowering adults with limited access to human career counselling  find the most  relevant training. Thanks to AI, skills profiling  may become more widely available  and the profiling  conducted by humans may become more accurate . Moreover,  timelier  and more granular labour  market information can be analysed , which may improve the match  between supply and demand  for skills. With the increasing availability of large amounts of vacancy data from online job po stings,  it is becoming increasingly common to use AI to assess which skills employers are looking for and  whether skill needs change over time within and across occupations. Using similar techniques, AI  can also be leveraged to automatically categori se edu cation and training programmes into skill  categories, which helps policymakers and employers find the training programme(s) that teach the 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   11  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  skills in need. AI -powered training suggestions may help people self -select into the training  programmes that will te ach them the skills they need in order to remain employable.    Finally, AI could help  increase diversity and inclusiveness  in the workplace, by training humans  in making fairer decisions and improving human interaction , for example when recruiting, assessing   work performance or providing feedback . Due to its immersive nature  and the possibility to create  full body ownership illusions, AI -powered augmented or virtual reality  training provides the unique  opportunity to experience situations through other people ’s eyes . Automating the assessment of  students through AI -powered adaptive assessments or through augmented or virtual reality training  may reduce bias in education and training.   Potential drawbacks of using AI for training and how they can be addressed   Despite its potential to address some of the barriers that adults face when approaching training, the use of  AI for training could in fact raise other existing barriers and generate new ones , notably:    Participating in training that is powered by AI requir es a higher level of digital skills  than  participating in face -to-face instruction , and in some cases attending a non -AI online training  course . Although the digital skills requirements may only be moderate, this still risks excluding  groups with lower dig ital skills, such as older adults and the low -skilled more generally. This may  decrease the inclusiveness of adult learning systems instead of increasing it as suggested above.  To get a sense of the size of the problem, in the OECD on average, 25% of adult s lack even the  most basic digital skills and another 14% can only perform basic functions on a computer or other  digital device. The expansion of trainin g programmes  for digital skills  is already high on the policy  agenda in most countries. As seen in the  context of the COVID -19 pandemic, t he delivery of more  training online, particularly if through AI technologies , would increase the urgency.      High data requirements and costs  can increase inequalities in access to AI tools for training   between large and  small enterprises. Most AI solutions, including the ones used for training , require  vast amounts of data and data storage, as well as powerful computers and access to high -speed  wireless internet networks. This may be particularly challenging for small an d medium enterprises  (SMEs), in low and middle -income countries and in rural areas. Moreover, the technical and data  needs as well as the required human resources to implement AI solutions can make them quite  costly. In order to ensure that AI improve s access to training for all  rather than for only a minority  of larger companies, appropriate mechanisms for sharing AI knowledge and solutions may need  to be put in place . These should  includ e mechanisms for sharing data, algorithms and AI  knowledge in general , while respecting privacy, intellectual property and other rights. Additionally,  external funding initiatives could be targeted for enterprises that face more challenges when it  comes to adoption.    Since AI can perform tasks that are traditionally human  (e.g. designing tests or providing career  guidance) , its introduction in training  would significantly  change the skill requirements  in jobs   related to training  – including teachers, trainers but also Human Resource managers  – potentially  leading to deskillin g in these occupations  and resistance in the adoption of AI . One way to address  this challenge is by providing opportunities for people in these occupations to reskill in order to  leverage their comparative advantage compared to AI systems, such as higher cognitive and social  skills. For instance, trainers and career counsellors could use the time gained through AI tools for  training to d evote  more attention to adults with more complex upskilling needs .   The use of AI for training raises similar  ethical and transparency issues as in other domains.   Many AI systems  lack explainability and transparency for the final users. At best, this could reduce  the value of using them in some aspects of the training process, for example to tailor training  conte nt. At worst, it could lead to bad training decisions, when used to identify skill gaps or assess  training outcomes.   In add ition, the lack of explai nability and transparency can discourage adults  
12  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  from undertak ing training that uses AI. People are unlikely  to (want to) start using AI tools for  training when they do not trust that the tools are easy to use, that they provide high quality unbiased  output that is easy to interpret, and that data are well protected and used in an ethical and fair way .  Building trust in AI requires the development of trustworthy, human -centred AI. As set out in the  OECD AI Principles, t rustworthy AI systems benefit people and planet; uphold human rights,  democratic values and fairness; are transparent and explainable; robust, sec ure and safe; and are  operated by accountable  entities  (OECD, 2019 [2]). Another way to build trust in AI is to increase  public understandi ng of what AI can and cannot do  and to be transparent about when it is being  used. Explainability and transparency of AI are essential for  people to challenge the outcome s  when necessary. Nevertheless, transparency about AI should respect personal data protection  obligations  and intellectual property. Finally, AI systems should includ e the capacity for human  intervention and oversight , meaning that AI tools for training are intended to empower humans, not  to replace their decision -making altogether. Informing people about this empowering role of AI tools  for training may help build the ir trust.   Assuming that the above drawbacks can be addressed, expanding the use of AI tools for training is  constrained by the supply of AI-specific digital skills  needed to develop the tools (e.g. Machine  Learning , Data Structures or Natural Language Processing skills). Even though the demand for AI skills  on the labour market is still relatively small (around 2% of IT job postings currently require AI skills),  shortages are  already  emerging . Countries with education systems that are r elatively unresponsive to  changing skill needs and with relatively few people willing to enrol in AI skills courses  may struggle to find  enough people to expand the use of AI tools for training. There are various ways in which countries can  try to address this challenge, including: i) raising awareness of the demand  for AI skills in the labour market  and the positive employment prospects they open up  through career guidance for youth and adults ; and  ii) making the development of AI skills more accessible, f or instance through targeted f inancial incentives .  Finally, to date there is a lack of scientific evidence  about the effectiveness of AI tools for training  compared to their non -AI or human alternatives.  Without rigorous and robust evidence about the  effec tiveness of AI tools for training , policymakers and employers cannot weigh the costs of these tools  against their benefits in their decisions to implement or expand the use  of AI tools for training.  Before  resources are allocated to the expansion of the us e of AI tools for training, further research is needed  in  order to improve our understanding of these tools, and whether the benefits of the different types of tools  outweigh  the costs , harms  and challenges.  Governments should therefore consider long -term public  investment and encourage private investment in research and development in trustworthy AI tools for  training that outperform non -AI and human alternatives.    
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Résumé   L'adoption de l'intelligence artificielle (IA) sur le lieu de travail est l'une des forces principales derrière  les  besoin s de reconversion professionnelle , mais elle pourrait aussi faire partie de la solution. L ’IA permet  notamment d'améliorer le ciblage des systèmes de formation pour adultes et l'accès à ceux -ci. C es  améliorations sont nécessaire s, car la façon dont nous travaillons évolue rapidement, et pourtant seuls  quatre adultes sur dix dans l'ensemble de l'OCDE participent à l'éducation et à la formation au cours d'une  année donnée, et ces chiffres sont encore plus faibles pour les  groupes vulnér ables sur le marché du  travail  (OECD, 2019 [1]). En outre, la qualité de la formation reste un problème, et aligner la formation sur  les besoins du marché du travail et les objectifs professionnels des in dividus peut être difficile. D'autres  technologies, telles que les outils de vidéoconférence, les plateformes sur Internet ou les algorithmes  d’appariement , ont été exploitées par le passé pour dispenser des formations, diffuser des informations  sur les ex igences en matière de compétences et les cours de formation pertinents ou faire la  correspondance  entre les demandeurs d'emploi et les possibilités d'apprentissage disponibles. L'IA a  l’opportunité d’ améliorer considérablement ces autres technologies et, d ans certains cas, elle peut  améliorer ou remplacer l'intervention humaine pour les adultes ayant des besoins d'information et de  formation relativement simples.        En s'appuyant sur une analyse de la littérature et sur les idées fournies par divers experts dans les  domaines de l'IA et de la formation, ce document met en évidence  les opportunités et les inconvénients  potentiels de l'utilisation de l'IA pour la formati on, et fournit  des messages précieux pour les décideurs  politiques, les services d'emploi publics et privés et les entreprises qui envisagent d'introduire des outils  d'IA dans les formations qu'ils proposent.   L'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation a le potentiel d'augmenter la participation à la formation, y compris  parmi les groupes actuellement sous -représentés, en abaissant certains des obstacles à la formation des  personnes et en augmentant la motivation à  la formation. De plus, certaines solutions d'IA pour la formation  peuvent améliorer l'alignement de la formation sur les besoins du marché du travail et réduire les préjugés  et la discrimination sur le lieu de travail. Néanmoins, malgré les avantages pote ntiels des outils d'IA pour  la formation, il existe également d’importants inconvénients potentiels de l’utilisation de l’IA pour la  formation , tels que le risque de réduire l'inclusivité des systèmes d e formation  des adultes en raison des  compétences numé riques nécessaires pour utiliser les outils, et les grandes quantités de données et  l'infrastructure technologique de haute qualité nécessaires pour développer des outils d'IA. L'utilisation de  l'IA pour la formation peut également entraîner des changement s importants dans les compétences  requises dans les emplois liés à la formation et au recrutement , générant une  résistance et des effets  négatifs sur l'emploi des professionnels concernés . De plus, l'IA pose des problèmes éthiques importants.  Pour exploite r pleinement le potentiel de l'IA et faire en sorte  que l'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation a des  résultats bénéfiques pour tous , nécessite davantage de recherches et de politiques qui répondent au  besoin de compétences numériques, aux coûts d'adoption  et au développement d'outils d'IA pour la  formation qui sont explicables, fiables et centrés sur l'humain.  
14  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Opportunités d'utiliser l'IA pour la formation    L'IA a le potentiel d'aider à surmonter certains des principaux obstacles à la participation à la  formation, notamment ceux liés aux contraintes de temps . Le contenu et l'évaluation basés sur  l'IA peuvent considérablement raccourcir le processus d'apprentissage, car ils permettent aux  apprenants de sauter des tâches de formation non pertinentes ou des mod ules entiers, et de se  concentrer uniquement sur le comblement de leurs lacunes en matière de connaissances et de  compétences. Étant donné que l'IA peut adapter la formation à des millions d'étudiants en même  temps, elle peut le faire à un coût nettement i nférieur à celui des tuteurs privés. Par rapport aux  cours en ligne sans IA où il n'y a pas d'interaction en direct entre les étudiants et les instructeurs  (par exemple, les cours en ligne ouverts et massifs), l'IA peut ajouter de la valeur en rendant les  sessions plus adaptées aux besoins individuels et interactives, par exemple en intégrant  des  fonctions de chat bot. De plus, grâce aux technologies de réalité augmentée et virtuelle (RA et RV)  alimentées par l'IA, les avantages de l'apprentissage à distance  peuvent être étendus à une  formation orientée vers la pratique.    L'IA peut permettre un enseignement personnalisé à grande échelle . L'IA permet de développer  des formations adaptées à des besoins spécifiques de reconversion, à un coût nettement inférieur  à celui des cours particuliers. Comme évoqué ci -dessus, les avantages peuvent être multiples. La  personnalisation peut se traduire par un gain de temps pour certains participants à la formation,   tout en aidant les populations vulnérables qui ont besoin de p lus de temps pour apprendre. La  personnalisation basée sur l'IA est évolutive à faible coût car elle ne nécessite pas de salles de  classe, d'enseignants ou de programmes personnalisés  supplémentaires . Cette évolutivité est  potentiellement bénéfique pour le s employeurs , les prestataires de formation et les décideurs   politiques .   L'IA peut aider les gens à trouver rapidement et facilement les programmes de formation  les  plus adaptés à leurs besoins, ce qui, à son tour, peut augmenter la motivation des individus à  participer à la formation . De nombreux gouvernements intensifient actuellement l'offre  d'orientation professionnelle en s'appuyant sur des plateformes Internet qui diffusent des  informations sur les compétences requises par profession, les pénu ries de compétences  émergentes et les possibilités de formation disponibles. L'IA peut contribuer à améliorer ces  activités d'orientation professi onnelle en ligne en imitant les interactions traditionnellement   entretenues avec l es conseillers d'orientation  professionnelle afin de mieux évaluer les besoins de  l'utilisateur et de produire des r ecommandations personnalisées. Des recommandations de  formation sur mesure, ainsi que des évaluations basées sur l'IA adaptées au niveau d'entrée et  aux progrès des app renants peuvent également augmenter la pertinence des  formation s, ce qui  pourrait encourager la participation et rédui re le taux d’abandon . Enfin, l'utilisation de l'IA pour la  formation peut augmenter la motivation à se former , notamment  par rapport à la formation en ligne  sans IA, en élargissant l'offre de formation axée sur la pratique via la RA et la RV, qui comprennent   souvent des éléments ludiques, et en fournissant un retour instantané à l'apprenant .    Les groupes vulnérables  – tels que les personnes peu qualifiées, handicapées ou non natives –  sont considérablement sous -représentés dans la formation. L'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation  peut être particulièrement intéressante pour eux. La fonctionnalité  axée sur la pratique de la RA et  de la RV peut être plus motivante pour les adultes qui se sont désengagés de l’enseignement  en  classe et pour les adultes qui ont du mal à comprendre les documents et les instructions écrits (par  exemple, les locuteurs non natifs ou les personnes peu alphabétisées). L 'accent mis par la RA et  la RV sur l'apprentissage des erreurs dans un environnement sûr peut motiver les personnes qui  ont peur de ne pas participer à la formation. De plus, la technologie de ‘speed -to-text’ et  ‘text-to-speech’, alimentée par l'IA , facilite le sous -titrage ou la lecture à haute voix de toute  communication orale ou écrite en temps réel, ainsi que sa traduction dans n'importe quelle langue.  Cela peut élargir l'accès à la formation pour les personnes malvoyant es ou les malentendant es. 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   15  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified   Les employeurs ont également des avantages à tirer  de l’offre de la formation par l'IA. La RA  en la RV peuvent être intéressantes pour les employeurs, en raison de leur flexibilité en termes de  temps et de lieu, mais aussi pour les économies potentielles d e matières premières et la prévention  des blessures physiques par rapport à la formation en personne. Enfin, l'IA peut contribuer à rendre  la participation à la formation plus efficace en améliorant la correspondance  entre les résultats de  la formation  de la formation et les lacunes en matière de compétences des individus.    L'IA peut contribuer  à rendre la formation plus efficace en permettant un meilleur alignement de  la formation sur les besoins en compétences, en améliorant l'évaluation des compétences et  les  suggestions de formation des conseillers humaine en carrière et en formation, ainsi qu’ en guidant  et en habilitant les adultes ayant un accès limité à l'orientation professionnelle humaine , à trouver  la formation la plus pertinente . Grâce à l'IA, le p rofilage des compétences peut devenir plus  largement disponible et le profilage effectué par les humains peut devenir plus précis. En outre , il  est possible d’analyser des informations plus actuelles et plus granulaires sur le marché du travail,  ce qui peu t améliorer l'adéquation entre l'offre et la demande de compétences. Avec la disponibilité  croissante de grandes quantités de données sur les postes vacants provenant des offres d'emploi  en ligne, il est de plus en plus courant d'utiliser l'IA pour évaluer  quelles  compétences les  employeurs recherchent et si les besoins en compétences changent au fil du temps au sein d’un  même profession ou d’une profession à l’autre . En utilisant des techniques similaires, l'IA peut  également être exploitée pour classer a utomatiquement les programmes d'éducation et de  formation en catégories de compétences, ce qui aide les décideurs politiques et les employeurs à  trouver le ou les programmes de formation qui enseignent les compétences recherchées . Les  suggestions de format ion alimentées par  l'IA peuvent aider les adultes  à choisir eux -mêmes les  programmes de formation qui leur apprendront les compétences dont ils ont besoin pour rester  employables.    Enfin, l'IA pourrait contribuer à accroître la diversité et l’intégration  sur le lieu de travail, en  apprenant aux  humains à prendre des décisions plus justes et à améliorer l'interaction humaine,  par exemple lors du recrutement, de l'évaluation des performances professionnelles  ou de la  rétroaction. En raison de sa nature immersi ve et de la possibilité de créer des illusions de propriété  corporelle, la formation via la  RA ou la RV  alimentée par l'IA offre l'occasion unique de vivre des  situations à travers les yeux d'autres personnes. L'automatisation de l'évaluation des étudiants  via  des évaluations adaptatives basées sur l'IA ou via une formation via la  RA ou la RV  peut réduire  les biais dans l'éducation et la formation .  Inconvénients potentiels de l'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation et comment y  remédier   Malgré son potentiel  à surmonter certains des obstacles auxquels les adultes sont confrontés lorsqu'ils  abordent la formation, l'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation pourrait en fait lever d'autres obstacles existants  et en générer de nouveaux, notamment  :   La participation à  une formation alimentée par l'IA nécessite un niveau de compétences  numériques plus élevé  que la participation à une formation en présentiel et, dans certains cas,  la participation à un cours de formation en ligne sans IA. Bien que les exigences en matièr e de  compétences numériques ne soient peut -être que modérées, cela risque tout de même  d'exclure  les groupes ayant de faibles compétences numériques , comme  les adultes  âgées et les personnes  peu qualifiées de manière plus générale . Cela peut diminuer l'inc lusivité des systèmes de formation   des adultes au lieu de l'augmenter comme suggéré ci -dessus. Pour avoir une idée de l'ampleur du  problème, dans l'OCDE en moyenne, 25 % des adultes n'ont pas les compétences numériques les  plus élémentaires et 14 % ne peuv ent exécuter que des fonctions de base sur un ordinateur ou un  autre appareil numérique. L'expansion des programmes de formation aux compétences 
16  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  numériques figure déjà parmi les priorités politiques de la plupart des pays. Comme on l'a vu dans  le contexte  de la pandémie de COVID -19, la mise en place d’ un plus grand nombre  de formations  en ligne, notamment par le biais de technologies d'AI, en augmenterait l'urgence.    Les exigences et les coûts élevés en matière de données  peuvent accroître les inégalités  d'accès aux outils d'IA pour la formation entre les grandes et les petites entreprises. La plupart des  solutions d'IA, y compris celles utilisées pour la formation, nécessitent de grandes quantités de  données et de stockage de données, ainsi que des ordinateu rs puissants et un accès à des  réseaux Internet sans fil à haut débit. Cela peut être particulièrement difficile pour les petites et  moyennes entreprises (PME), dans les pays à revenu faible ou intermédiaire et dans les zones  rurales. En outre , les besoins  techniques et de données ainsi que les ressources humaines  nécessaires pour mettre en œuvre des solutions d'IA peuvent les rendre assez coûteuses. Afin de  garantir que l'IA améliore l'accès à la formation pour tous plutôt que pour seulement une minorité  de grandes entreprises, il peut être nécessaire de mettre en place des  mécanismes appropriés de  partage des connaissances et des solutions en matière d'IA. Ceux -ci devraient inclure des  mécanismes de partage des données, des algorithmes et des connaissances  de l'IA en général,  tout en respectant la vie privée, la propriété intellectuelle et d'autres droits. De plus, des initiatives  de financement externe pourraient être ciblées pour les entreprises qui rencontrent davantage  de  difficult és en matière d'adoption.    Étant donné que l'IA peut effectuer des tâches traditionnellement humaines (par exemple, la  conception  de tests l’orientation professionnelle), son introduction dans la formation modifierait  considérablement les compétences  requises  dans les emplois liés à la formation - y compris  les enseignants, les formateurs mais aussi les responsables des ressources humaines -, ce qui  pourrait entraîner une déqualification dans ces métiers , et à une résistance à l'adoption de l'IA .  L’un des moye ns de relever  ce défi consiste à offrir aux personnes exerçant ces professions la  possibilité de se reconvertir  afin de tirer parti de leur avantage comparatif par rapport aux systèmes  d'IA, tels que des compétences cognitives et sociales supérieures. Par exemple, les formateurs et  les conseillers d'orientation professionnelle pourraient utiliser le temps gagné grâce aux outils d'IA  pour la formation afin de consacrer plus d'attention aux adultes ayant des besoins de formation   plus complexes.    L'utilisation de l'IA pour la formation soulève des problèmes d'éthique et de transparence   similaires à ceux dans d'autres domaines. De nombreux systèmes d'IA manquent d'explicabilité et  de transparence pour les utilisateurs finaux. Au mieux, cela pourrait réduire la va leur de leur  utilisation dans certains aspects du processus de formation, par exemple pour adapter le contenu  de la formation. Au pire, cela pourrait conduire à de mauvaises décisions de formation, lorsqu'il est  utilisé pour identifier les lacunes en matiè re de compétences ou évaluer les résultats de la  formation. En outre , le manque d'explicabilité et de transparence peut décourager les adultes de  suivre  une formation utilisant l'IA. Il est peu probable que les personnes  (veulent) commencer à  utiliser des outils d'IA pour la formation lorsqu'ils ne croient pas que les outils sont faciles à utiliser,  qu'ils fournissent des résultats impartiaux de haute qualité et faciles à interpréter et que les  données sont bien protégées et utilisées de manière éthique et équitable. Renforcer  la confiance  dans l'IA nécessite le développement d'une IA digne de confiance et centrée sur l’homme . Comme  indiqué dans les principes d'IA de l'OCDE, les systèmes d'IA fiables sont bénéfiques  aux  personnes et à la planète  ; ils respec tent les droits de l'homme, les valeurs démocratiques et  l'équité  ; ils sont transparents et explicables  ; ils sont robuste, sécurisé et sûr  ; et ils sont gérés par  des entités responsables  (OECD, 2019 [2]). Une autre façon de renforcer la confiance dans l'IA est  d’améliorer  la compréhension du public de ce que l'IA peut et ne peut pas faire et de faire preuve  de transparence quant au  moment où elle est utilisée. L'explicabilité et la transparence de l'IA so nt  essentielles pour que les gens puissent  contester  les résultats si nécessaire . Néanmoins, la  transparence sur l'IA doit respecter les obligations de protection des données personnelles et la  propriété intellectuelle. Enfin, les systèmes d'IA devraient i nclure la capacité d'intervention et de 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   17  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  surveillance humaines, ce qui signifie que les outils d'IA pour la formation sont destinés à renforcer  les capacités des  humains, et non à remplacer complètement leur prise de décision. Informer les  gens sur ce rôle d'autonomisation des outils d'IA pour la formation peut contribuer  à renforcer leur  confiance.   En supposant que les inconvénients susmentionnés  puissent être résolus, le développement  de l'utilisation  des outils d' IA pour la formation est limité  par l'offr e de compétences numériques spécifiques à l'IA   nécessaires pour développer les outils (par exemple, des compétences en apprentissage automatique, en  structures de données ou en traitement du langage naturel). Même si la demande de compétences en IA  sur le marché du travail est encore relativement faible (environ 2% des offres d'emploi en informatique  nécessitent actuellement des compétences en IA), des pénuries apparaissent déjà. Les pays dont les  systèmes éducatifs sont relativement peu réactifs  à l'évolut ion des besoins en compétences et avec  relativement peu de personnes disposées à s'inscrire à des cours de formation  en IA pourraient  avoir du  mal à trouver suffisamment de personnes pour étendre l'utilisation des outils d'IA pour la formation. Les  pays pe uvent tenter de relever ce défi de diverses  manières, notamment  : i) en sensibilisant à la demande  de compétences en IA sur le marché du travail et aux perspectives d'emploi positives qu'elles ouvrent ,  grâce à  l'orientation professionnelle des jeunes et de s adultes ; et ii) en rendant  le développement des  compétences en IA plus accessible, par exemple par des incitations financières ciblées.   Enfin, à ce jour, il existe un manque de preuves scientifiques  sur l'efficacité des outils d'IA pour la  formation par rapport à leurs alternatives non -IA ou humaines. En l’absence de  preuves rigoureuses et  solides sur l'efficacité des outils d'IA pour la formation, les décideurs politiques et les employeurs ne  peuven t pas peser les coûts de ces outils par rapport à leurs avantages dans leurs décisions de mettre en  œuvre ou d'étendre l'utilisation des outils d'IA pour la formation. Avant d’allouer des ressources  à  l'expansion de l'utilisation des outils d'IA pour la fo rmation, des recherches supplémentaires sont  nécessaires afin d'améliorer notre compréhension de ces outils et de déterminer  si les avantages des  différents types d'outils l'emportent sur les coûts, les inconvénients et les défis. Les gouvernements  devraie nt donc envisager des investissements publics à long terme et encourager les investissements  privés dans la recherche et le développement d'outils d'IA fiables pour la formation qui surpassent les  alternatives non IA et humaines.    
18  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Zusammenfassung   Die Einfü hrung von Künstlicher Intelligenz (KI) ist zwar unter den wichtigsten Gründen  für die  Notwendigkeit von Weiterbildung, kann aber auch Teil der Lösung sein. Tatsächlich hat k ünstliche  Intelligenz (KI) das Potenzial, die Ausrichtung von Erwachsenenbildungssy stemen sowie den Zugang zu  ihnen  zu verbessern. Dies ist notwendig, da sich die Art und Weise, wie wir arbeiten, schnell verändert  und dennoch nur vier von zehn Erwachsenen in der OECD an Weiterbildung teil nehmen in einem  bestimmten Jahr . Unter  benachteili gten Gruppen auf dem Arbeitsmarkt ist die Teilnahme noch geringer   (OECD, 2019 [1]). Darüber hinaus bleib en die Weiter bildungsqualität, sowie  die Anpassung der  Weiterbildung  an d ie Bedürfnisse des  Arbeitsmarkt es und an die  Karriereziele von Einzelnen eine  Herausforderung.  Andere Technologien wie Videokonferenz -Tools, internetbasierte Plattformen oder  Matching -Algorithmen wurden bereits in der Vergangenheit eingesetzt, um Weiterbildung en  durchzuführen, Informationen ü ber Qualifikationsanforderungen und relevante Weiterbildungen zu  verbreiten oder Arbeitssuchende mit verfügbaren Lernangeboten zusammenzubringen. KI hat das  Potenzial, diese Technologien erheblich zu verbessern, und in einigen Fällen kann sie die menschlic he  Intervention bei Erwachsenen mit relativ einfachen Informations - und Schulungsbedürfnissen verbessern  oder ersetzen.        Ausgehend von einer Literaturrecherche und Erkenntnissen verschiedener Expertinnen und Experten aus  den Bereichen KI und Weiter bildung beleuchtet d ieser Bericht  die potenziellen Chancen und  Herausforderungen  des Einsatzes von KI für die Weiter bildung und liefert wertvolle Botschaften für  politische Entscheidungsträger, öffentliche und private Arbeitsvermittlungen und Unternehmen, die die  Einführung von KI -Tools in ihr Weiter bildungsangebot erwägen.   Der Einsatz von KI für Weiterbildung hat das Potenzial, die Weiterbildungsbeteiligung zu erhöhen, auch  bei derzeit unterrepräsentierten Gruppen, indem sie die Motivation zur Weiterbildun g erhöht und einige  der Hindernisse abbaut, mit denen die Menschen konfrontiert sind . Darüber hinaus können einige  KI-Lösungen die Anpassung der Weiterbildung an die Bedürfnisse des Arbeitsmarktes verbessern und  Vorurteile und Diskriminierung am Arbeitspla tz verringern . Ungeachtet d er potenziellen Vorteile von  KI-Tools in der  Weiter bildung gibt es jedoch auch potenzielle Nachteile, wie z.B.  die großen Datenmengen  und die hochwertige technologische Infrastruktur, die für die Entwicklung von KI -Tools benötigt  werden.  Der Einsatz von KI in der  Weiter bildung kann auch zu erheblichen Veränderungen der  Qualifikationsanforderungen an Weiterbildungsanbieter führen , was Widerstand und negative  Beschäftigungseffekte für d ie betroffenen Fachkräfte auslösen kann . Darübe r hinaus bringt KI wichtige  ethische Fragen mit sich. Um das volle Potenzial von KI auszuschöpfen und sicherzustellen, dass der  Einsatz von KI in der  Weiterbildung  Vorteile  für alle hat, bedarf es  mehr Forschung und Richtlinien, die  sich mit dem Bedarf an digitalen und rechnerischen Fähigkeiten, sowie den Kosten der Einführung und  der Entwicklung vertrauenswürdiger, menschzentrierter erklärbarer KI -Tools für die Weiter bildung  befassen.   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   19  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Möglichkeiten der Verwendung von KI in der  Weiterbildung    KI hat das Potenzial, bei dem Abbau von wichtigen Hindernisse an der  Teilnahme an Weiterbildung  zu unterstützen , insbesondere wo Zeit eine große Barriere  ist. KI-basierte Inhalte und  Auswertungen können den Lernprozess erheblich verkürzen, da sie es den Le rnenden  ermöglichen, irrelevante Aufgaben oder ganze Module zu überspringen und sich darauf zu  konzentrieren, ihre Wissens - und Fähigkeitslücken zu schließen. Da KI die Weiterbildung   gleichzeitig auf Millionen von Schüler zuschneiden kann, ist dies zu deut lich geringeren Kosten  möglich als bei nicht-KI-Online -Kursen . Darüber hinaus kann KI einen Mehrwert für asynchrone  Weiterbildungen schaffen, bei denen es keine Live -Interaktion zwischen Lernenden  und  Lehrenden  gibt (zum Beispiel durch die Einbindung von C hat-Bot-Funktionen ). Auch können dank  KI-gestützter Augmented - und Virtual -Reality -Technologien (AR und VR) die Vorteile des  Fernstudiums auf eine praxisorientierte Weiter bildung ausgeweitet werden.    KI kann individualisierte Bildung in großem Maßstab  ermöglichen. Sie ermöglicht die  Anpassung von Weiterbildungskursen an die spezifischen Bedürfnisse der Teilnehmenden zu  deutlich geringeren Kosten als nicht -KI Angebote. Wie oben erörtert, können die Vorteile vielfältig  sein. Die Personalisierung kann für  einige Teilnehmende Zeit einsparen oder benachteiligten  Menschen helfen, die mehr Zeit zum Lernen benötigen. Die KI -gesteuerte Personalisierung ist zu  geringen Kosten skalierbar, da keine zusätzlichen Klassenzimmer, Lehrende oder  maßgeschneiderte Lehrplän e erforderlich sind. Diese Skalierbarkeit kann Arbeitgebern,  Bildungsanbietern und politischen Entscheidungsträgern zugutekommen.    KI kann Menschen dabei helfen, schnell und einfach Weiterbildung sprogramme zu finden , die  ihren Bedürfnissen am besten entspre chen, was wiederum die Motivation zur Teilnahme an  Weiterbildung  von Einzelnen  erhöhen kann. Viele Regierungen weiten  derzeit Berufsberatung  und -orientierung in Form von internetbasierten Plattformen aus , welche  Informationen zu  Qualifikationsanforderunge n bieten organisiert nach Berufen, nach sich abzeichnende n  Qualifikationsdefizite n und nach verfügbare n B ildungsmöglichkeiten.  Maßgeschneiderte  Weiterbildung sempfehlungen  sowie KI -basierte Leistungsb ewertungen, die auf das  Einstiegsniveau und den Fortschri tt der Lernenden zugeschnitten sind, können auch  die Relevanz  des Trainings erhöhen und Abbrüche vermeiden . Schließlich kann der Einsatz von KI in der   Weiterbildung die Motivation zu r Teilnahme an Weiterbildung erhöhen, insbesondere im Vergleich  zu Online -Training ohne KI, da das Angebot praxisorientierter Weiterbildung durch AR und VR   erweitert wird , welche  oft spielerische Elemente beinhalten  und de n Lernenden sofortiges  Feedback geben .   Benachteiligte  Gruppen  – wie Geringqualifizierte, Menschen mit Behinderung  oder Nicht Muttersprachler – nehmen aktuell deutlich weniger an Weiterbildung teil . Der Einsatz von KI in der   Weiterbildung kann für sie besonders attraktiv sein. Die praxisorientierte Komponente von AR un d  VR kann für Erwachsene, die das Lernen  im Klassenzimmer nicht mehr gewohnt sind , oder  Schwierigkeiten haben, schriftliche Materialien und Anwei sungen zu verstehen (z.B.  Nicht -Muttersprachler oder Personen mit geringen Lese - und Schreibfähigkeiten), motiv ierender  sein. Der Fokus von AR und VR auf das Lernen aus Fehlern in einer sicheren Umgebung kann  Menschen Ängste vor dem Lernen nehmen . Darüber hinaus erlei chtert die KI -gestützte  Text-to-Speech - und Speech -to-Text-Technologie das Untertiteln oder Vorlese n jeder  gesprochenen oder geschriebenen Kommunikation in Echtzeit sowie deren Übersetzung in jede  Sprache. Dies kann den Zugang zu Schulungen für Menschen mit Seh - und Hörbehinderung   erweitern.    Auch Arbeitgeber profitieren  von der Weiter bildung durch KI. A R und VR können aufgrund ihrer  zeitlichen und räumlichen Flexibilität für Arbeitgeber interessant sein, aber auch wegen des  Einsparpotenzials bei Rohstoffen und der Verringerung von Verletzungsgefahr en im Vergleich zu 
20  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Präsenz veranstaltungen . Schließlich kann KI dazu beitragen, die Teilnahme an Weiterbildung  effizienter zu gestalten, indem sie die Übereinstimmung zwischen den Lernergebnissen der  Weiterbildung und den Qualifikationslücken der einzelnen Personen verbessert .   KI kann dazu beitrag en, Weiter bildung wirkungsvoller zu gestalten , indem sie eine bessere  Ausrichtung der Weiterbildung auf den Qualifikationsbedarf ermöglicht . Sie kann die Auswertung en  und Weiterbildungs vorschläge der menschlichen Bildungsberate nden  verbesser n und  Erwachsen e mit eingeschränktem Zugang zu persönlicher Beratung  anleite n. Dank KI kann die  Erstellung von Kompetenzprofilen breiter verfügbar und die von Menschen durchgeführte  Profilerstellung genauer werden. Darüber hinaus können aktuellere  und detailliertere  Arbe itsmarktinformationen bereitgestellt  werden, was die Übereinstimmung zwischen Angebot und  Nachfrage nach Qualifikationen verbessern kann. Mit der zunehmenden Verfügbarkeit großer  Mengen an Daten zu Stellenangeboten aus Online -Stellenausschreibungen kann KI  genutzt  werden, u m zu beurteilen, nach welchen Qualifikationen Arbeitgeber suchen und ob sich der  Qualifikationsbedarf im Laufe der Zeit innerhalb und zwischen verschiedenen Berufen ändert. Mit  ähnlichen Techniken kann KI auch genutzt werden, um Bildungs - und Weiter bildungsprogramme  automatisch in Qualifikationskategorien einzuteilen , was politischen Entscheidungsträgern und  Arbeitgebern hilft, Weiterbildungs programme zu finden, die die benötigten Fertigkeiten vermitteln.  KI-gestützte Weiterbildung svorschl äge können den Menschen helfen, selbst die Kurse   auszuwählen, die ihnen die gewünschten  Fähigkeiten vermitteln, um beschäftigungsfähig zu  bleiben.    Schließlich kann  KI die Vielfalt und Inklusion am Arbeitsplatz erhöhen , indem Menschen darin  geschult werden,  fairere Entscheidungen zu treffen und die menschliche Interaktion zu verbessern,  beispielsweise bei der Einstellung, Bewertung der Arbeitsleistung oder der Bereitstellung von  Feedback. Aufgrund seiner immersiven Natur bietet KI -gestütztes AR und VR -Training die  einzigartige Möglichkeit, Situationen durch die Augen anderer Menschen zu erleben. Die Nutzung  von KI-gestützte n Technologien  oder AR und VR -Training kann bei der Bewertung von Lernenden  zu objektiveren Bewertungen führen .  Potenzielle Herausf orderungen bei  der Verwendung von KI in der Weiterbildung   und wie sie angegangen werden können   Trotz ihres Potenzials, einige der Barrieren zu überwinden, mit denen Erwachsene bei der Teilnahme  an  Weiterbildung  konfrontiert sind, kann  der Einsatz von KI fü r die Weiterbildung tatsächlich andere  bestehende Barrieren erhöhen und neue schaffen, insbesondere:    Die Teilnahme an KI -gestützte r Weiterbildung erfordert ein höheres Maß an digitalen  Fähigkeiten  als die Teilnahme an Präsenz kursen  und in einigen Fällen auch als die Teilnahme an  einem Online -Schulungskurs ohne Nutzung von KI. Auch wenn die Anforderungen an digitale  Kompetenzen möglicherweise nur gering  sind, besteht dennoch die Gefahr, dass Gruppen mit  wenigen  digitalen Kompetenzen , wie ältere Erwachsene un d Geringqualifizierte , ausgeschlossen  werden. Dies kann die Inklusivität von Erwachsenenbildungssystemen verringern, anstatt sie, wie  oben vorgeschlagen, zu erhöhen. Um ein Gefühl für das Ausmaß des Problems zu bekommen: Im  OECD -Durchschnitt fehlen 25 % de r Erwachsenen die grundlegendsten digitalen Fähigkeiten und  weitere 14 % können nur grundlegende Funktionen auf einem Computer oder einem anderen  digitalen Gerät ausführen. Der Ausbau von Trainingsprogrammen für digitale Kompetenzen steht  in den meisten Lä ndern bereits weit oben auf der politischen Agenda. Wie der Kontext der  COVID -19 Pandemie gezeigt hat, würde d ie Bereitstellung von mehr online  Weiterbildung sangeboten, insbesondere bei KI -unterstützten Formaten,  die Dringlichkeit des  Ausbaus erhöhen.  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   21  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified   Hohe  Datenanforderungen und -kosten  können die Ungleichheiten beim Zugang zu KI -Tools für  Weiterbildung zwischen großen und kleinen Unternehmen erhöhen. Die meisten KI -Lösungen,  einschließlich derjenigen, die für Weiterbildung verwendet werden, erfordern riesi ge Datenmengen  und Datenspeicher sowie leistungsstarke Computer und Zugang zu schnellem drahtlose m Internet .  Dies kann für kleine und mittlere Unternehmen (KMU), in Ländern mit niedrigem und mittlerem  Einkommen und in ländlichen Gebieten eine besondere Her ausforderung darstellen. Darüber  hinaus können die technischen und datentechnischen Anforderungen sowie die erforderlichen  personellen Ressourcen für die Implementierung von KI -Lösungen sie recht kostspielig machen.  Um sicherzustellen, dass KI den Zugang z u Weiterbildung  für alle , und nicht nur für eine Minderheit  größerer Unternehmen verbessert, müssen möglicherweise geeignete Mechanismen für den  Austausch von KI -Wissen und -Lösungen eingeführt werden. Diese sollten Mechanismen für den  Austausch von Daten,  Algorithmen und KI -Wissen im Allgemeinen umfassen, wobei die  Privatsphäre, das geistige Eigentum und andere Rechte gewahrt werden. Darüber hinaus könnten  externe Finanzierungsinitiativen auf die Unternehmen ausgerichtet sein, die bei der Einführung vor  größeren Herausforderungen stehen.    Da KI traditionell menschliche Aufgaben erfüllen kann (z.B. die Gestaltung von Tests oder  Berufsberatung), würde ihre Einführung in die Weiter bildung die Qualifikationsanforderungen in  weiter bildungsbezogenen Berufen erhebl ich verändern  – einschließlich  derer an  Lehre nde,  Weiterbildungspersonal , aber auch an Personalleit ungen in Unternehmen  – und möglicherweise  zu Dequalifizierung in diesen Berufen führen , sowie zu Widerständen bei der Einführung von KI .  Eine Möglichkeit, di eser Herausforderung zu begegnen, besteht darin, Menschen in diesen  Berufen Möglichkeiten zur Weiterbildung zu bieten, um ihre komparativen Vorteil e gegenüber  KI-Systemen  zu nutzen , wie beispielsweise höhere kognitive und soziale Fähigkeiten.  Bildungsanbieter  und Berufsberater könnten beispielsweise die durch KI -Tools gewonnene Zeit  nutzen, um Erwachsenen mit komplexerem Weiterbildungsbedarf mehr Aufmerksamkeit zu  schenken.    Der Einsatz von KI wirft ähnliche ethische und Transparenz fragen  in der  Weiterbildung auf wie  in anderen Bereichen. Vielen KI -Systemen fehlt es Transparenz für die Endnutzer. Dies könnte im  besten Fall den Mehrw ert ihrer Verwendung in einigen Aspekten des Weiterbildung sprozesses  verringern, beispielsweise um Weiterbildung sinhalte zuzuschneiden. Es kann aber auch  zu  schlechten Weiter bildungsentscheidungen führen, wenn es dazu verwendet wird,  Qualifikationslücken zu erkennen oder Weiter bildungsergebnisse zu bewerten. Darüber hinaus  kann der Mangel an Transparenz Erwachsene davon  abhalten, eine KI-unterstützte Weiter bildung  zu wählen . Es ist unwahrscheinlich, dass Menschen KI -Tools für Weiterbildung nutzen  (wollen),  wenn sie nicht darauf vertrauen, dass die Tools einfach zu verwenden sind, dass sie qualitativ  hochwertige, unvorein genommene Ergebnisse liefern, die leicht zu interpretieren sind und dass  die Daten gut geschützt sind. Der Aufbau von Vertrauen in KI erfordert die Entwicklung einer  vertrauenswürdigen, menschzentrierten KI. Wie in den KI -Prinzipien der OECD festgelegt,  kommen vertrauenswürdige KI -Systeme den Menschen und dem Planeten zugute;  Menschenrechte, demokratische Werte und Fairness wahren; sind transparent und verständlich ;  robust und sicher; und werden von verantwortlichen Stellen betrieben (OECD, 2019 [2]). Eine  weitere Möglichkeit, Vertrauen in KI aufzubauen, besteht darin, das öffentliche Verständnis dafür  zu verbessern, was KI kann und was nicht, und transparent aufzuzeigen  wann sie eingesetzt wird.  Nachvollziehbarkeit  und T ransparenz von KI sind für die Menschen unerlässlich, um die  Ergebnisse bei Bedarf in Frage zu stellen. Dennoch sollte Transparenz in Bezug auf KI die  Verpflichtungen zum Schutz personenbezogener Daten und des geistigen Eigentums  respektieren. Schließlich sollten KI -Systeme die Möglichkeit für  menschliche s Eingreifen und  Beaufsichtigen beinhalten, was bedeutet, dass KI -Werkzeuge in der  Weiterbildung  Menschen  befähigen sollen, ihre Entscheidungsfindung nicht vollständig zu ersetzen. Information über diese 
22  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  stärkende Rolle von KI -Tools in der  Weiter bildung kann dazu beitragen, das Vertrauen der  Menschen aufzubauen.   Unter der Annahme, dass die oben genannten Nachteile behoben werden können, w erden  dennoch die  eingeschränkten KI-spezifischen digitalen Fähigkeit en, die für die Entwicklung der Tools erforderlich  sind (z. B. maschinelles Lernen, Fähigkeiten zur Verarbeitung von Datenstrukturen oder natürlicher  Sprache) , die Ausweitung des Einsatzes von KI -Tools für die Weiterbildung erschweren . Auch wenn die  Nachfr age nach KI -Kenntnissen auf dem Arbeitsmarkt noch rela tiv gering ist (rund 2 % der  IT-Stellenausschreibungen erfordern derzeit KI -Kenntnisse), zeichnet sich bereits jetzt ein Mangel ab.  Länder mit Bildungssystemen, die nur langsam  auf den sich ändernden Qu alifikationsbedarf reagieren,  und relativ wenig  Nachfrage nach  KI-Kursen  in der Bevölkerung , haben möglicherweise Schwierigkeiten,  genügend Personen zu finden, um den Einsatz von KI -Tools in der  Weiterbildung auszuweiten. Es gibt  verschiedene Möglichkeiten , wie Länder versuchen können, dieser Herausforderung zu begegnen,  darunter: i) Sensibilisierung für die Nachfrage nach KI -Kompetenzen auf dem Arbeitsmarkt und die guten   Beschäftigungsaussichten, die sie durch Berufsberatung für Jugendliche und Erwachsene eröffnen; und  ii) die Aneignung  von KI -Kompetenzen leichter zugänglich zu machen, beispielsweise durch gezielte  finanzielle Anreize.   Schließlich fehlt es bis heute an wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnissen  über die Wirksamkeit von KI -Tools  in der Weiterbildung  im Vergleich zu ihren nicht -KI oder menschlichen Alternativen. Ohne rigorose und  belastbare Nachweise über die Wirksamkeit von KI -Tools in der Weiterbildung können politische  Entscheidungsträger und Arbeitgeber bei ihren Entscheidungen über die Einführung o der Ausweitung des  Einsatzes von KI -Tools für die Weiterbildung die Kosten dieser Tools nicht gegen ihren Nutzen abwägen.  Bevor Ressourcen für die Ausweitung des Einsatzes von KI -Tools in der Weiterbildung bereitgestellt  werden, ist weitere Forschung erfor derlich . Das  Verständnis der Wirkungsweisen dieser Tools muss   verbesser t werden um herauszufinden, ob der Nutzen der verschiedenen Tools d en Kosten, Schäden und  Herausforderungen überwiegt. Regierungen sollten daher langfristige öffentliche Investitionen in Betracht  ziehen und private Investitionen in Forschung und Entwicklung in vertrauenswürdige KI -Tools für die  Weiterbildung fördern, die be sser sind als nicht -KI und menschliche Alternativen.    
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   23  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Glossary   Artificial Intelligence   The AI Group of Experts at the OECD has defined the Artificial Intell igence (AI) system as a  machine -based system that can, for a given set of human -defined objectives, make predictions,  recommendations or decisions influencing real or virtual environments. AI systems are designed to  operate with varying levels of autonomy. AI system lifecycle phases cons ist of: 1) planning and design,  data collection and processing, and model building and interpretation; 2) verification and validation; 3)  deployment; and 4) operation and monitoring (OECD, 2019 [2]).  Machine Learning   Machine Learning  (ML) is a set of AI techniques that allow machines to learn in an automated manner  through patterns and inferences rather than through explicit instructions from a human. Behind ML is a  technique referred to as ‘neural networks’, which is ac companied by growing computational power and  the availability of massive datasets, also known as big data (OECD, 2019 [2]).  Natural Language Processing   Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a component of AI that enables  machines to understand human  language. By analysing the meaning of individual words, as well as the grammar that specifies the  relationship between the words, NLP can extract meaning from large amounts of text and documents.  When NLP is combined with ML t echniques (also known as ‘statistical NLP’), it becomes possible to  identify the most likely meaning of a sentence or phrase (Nadkarni, Ohno -Machado and Chapman,  2011 [3]). Common applications of NLP ar e automatic translations, grammar and spell check software, or  automatically producing summaries of documents.   Big Data   The term “big data” refers to data that is so large, fast or complex that it is difficult or impossible to  process using traditional me thods (SAS, 2021 [4]). Using AI, big data can be processed, analysed and  summarised so that it becomes manageable and understandable for humans.      
24  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  1. Due to technological developments, particularly automation and digit alisation, the way we work is  changing and t his is refle cted in chang ing skill needs in the  labour market. On average, about 15%  of today’s jobs in the OECD could disappear due to automation, and another 32% of jobs could  see significant change in the way they are performed  (Nedelkoska and Quintini, 2018 [5]).  Additionally, recent developments in Artificial Intelligence (AI) are likely to reshape the work  environment of many people, by changing the content and design  of their jobs, the way workers  interact with each other and with machines, and how work effort and efficiency are monitored . AI  can play an important role in facilitating human -machine collaboration, helping workers in the  execution of tedious or physically demanding tasks while allowing them to leverage their own  uniquely human abilities  (Lane and Saint -Martin, 2021 [6]).  2. These changes and the speed at wh ich they happen increase the need for adults to participate in  learning activities  throughout their working lives . However,  many adult learning systems across  OECD countries  are unprepar ed for this task.  For instance, adult participation in learning activi ties  is relatively low , particularly for those who need training  the most. Only four in ten  adults participate  in training  each year on average in the OECD , and participation is as low as two in ten  for  low-skilled adults. P eople experience barriers to participation  related to funding and time , or have  low motivation to train. Moreover, training quality remains an issue and aligning training to labour  market needs and individuals’ career goals can be challenging. This highlights the need to improve  adult  learning systems across the OECD.   3. Based on a review of the relevant literature  and discussions  with various experts in the fields of  AI  and training, this working paper shows that, while technological developments such as AI are one  of the major forces d riving the need for retraining, they have the potential to also be part of the  solution. Compared to human s or other technologies that are u sed for training, such as  video -conferencing tools or internet -based training platforms, AI provides valuable opport unities to  lower existing barriers to training participation by tailoring content or assessment, providing  relevant training suggestions, or changing the overall learning experience. However, AI might also  create entirely new barriers  to training participa tion, for instance because people may be  unprepared or afraid of using this technology , because smaller firms do not have access to the  required data and technologies to develop or adopt AI for training, or because of ethical or even  legal risks.    4. These ar e important and novel insights, because even though AI is not a new technology, its  access, speed, availability and affordability has dramatically increased in the past decade. Many   public and private employment services and  (smaller) companies are only st arting to consider the  implementation of AI -powered systems, and for many workers it is a relatively new technology to  encounter in the workplace. By shedding light on the potential opportunities and drawbacks of  using AI for training, this  working paper  draws valuable m essages for policymakers , public and  private employment services and firms that are consider ing introducing AI tools in the  training  they  offer.  5. Chapter 2 provides an overview of the different ways in which AI can be leveraged at each stage  of the adult learning process, from the assessment of current or future skill needs and  the matching  of people to training that address those needs, to the design of training content and assessment , 1.  Introduction  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   25  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  and the identification of innovative modes of delivery.  Illustrated by concrete examples, Chapter 3  demonstrates  how AI tools for training  have the potential to help alleviate barriers to training  participation and improve alignment of people’s training and skills to labour market needs. Chapter  4 sheds light o n potential challenges  to be overcome  in the use of AI for training  in order to realise  the benefits and ensu re that using AI for training has beneficial outcomes for all . Chapter 5  concludes.  
26  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified    This chapt er describes the  potential  contribution of AI at each stage of the  adult learning process . It discusses  how AI may help improve the  assessment of changing skill needs, sharpen the targeting of training,  design content that is in line with individual skill gaps, ad dress barriers to  participation through novel delivery channels and con tinuou sly assess  learning outcomes to achieve a personalisation of learning pathways.         6. AI has the potential to help improve adult learning in many different ways, interveni ng at different  stages of the process  (see Figure  2.1). In preparation for training  provision, it can help  assess skill  demand by facilitating the analysis of emerging skill requirements up until the recent past through  vast amounts of online vacancy data, and the analysis of skill supply through skills profiling tools.  Once skill gaps between individuals’ abi lities and available jobs have been assessed , AI can help  identify suitable training opportunities to fill those gaps. Thanks to AI, the content of training can  be tailored to individual needs and continuously adapted to the progress achieved. Finally, AI can  help deliver training in innovative ways, breaking physical and psychological barriers to training by  providing safe environments  for experimentation and tri al and error. Each of these  areas is  described below, highlighting potential uses of AI and cur rent applications.  2.  How AI can be used for adult  education and training  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   27  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Figure  2.1. The a dult learning process : where and how AI may help    Source: OECD Secretariat.   2.1. Planning : using AI to assess skill demand and supply , and map training  provision   7. Training stand s to fill the gap between the skills possessed by individuals and those required by  the labour market. As structural trends change skill requirements  at work, adults need continuous  reskilling and upskilling.  Individual skills can also deteriorate if left unused or become obsolete,  calling for continuous  upgrading throughout the working life. AI has the potential to keep track of  changes on both sides , thus facilitating the assessment of training needs.   2.1.1.  AI can  help analyse emerging skill requirements …  8. Non-AI methods for the identification of changing demand for  skills exist (Nedelkoska and Quintini,  2018 [5]; OECD, 2017 [7]), but using AI ca n automate and scale -up the exercise , providing more  timely and granular information for narrowly defined occupations and geographical locations . For  instance, AI can help recognise patterns in vast amounts of vacancy data to identify declining or  emerging  jobs up until the recent past . It can also automatically classify job descriptions  into tasks   or skills , which can be converted into an estimated risk of automation , based on previous research .  When the data on emerging or declining occupations are combin ed with a mapping of skills in  occupations, it also becomes possible to identify changing skill needs within occupations. Again,  non-AI solutions for  skills mappings do exist (e.g.  O*NET, ESCO , or the UK Skills and Employment  Survey ) but AI can scale -up the exercise , for instance by automatically classifying vacancy texts  into skill categories by occupation. AI can also increase timeliness in a context where job content  is changing more rapidly than annual surveys or expert consultations can d etect . For instance, by Planning•Assessing skill demands •Individual skill profiling Matching •Identifying training to fill skill gaps Content and  assessment•Tailoring content to individual  needs •Adapting assessment to  progress Delivery•Delivering  training in  innovative  ways
28  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  applying a Machine Learning  algorithm  on vacancy data from 16 countries, OECD.AI  (2021 [8])  provides estimates of AI skill demand by week, up until about four months before publication (s ee  Figure  2.2). People working in occupations where skill requirements are changing as a result of  the introduction of new processes, products and technologies, can the n be encouraged to  participate in training that prepares them for the new demands of their profession.     Figure  2.2. Relative international demand for Machine Learning skills     Note: This line chart shows the probability that Machine Learning skills appear in an IT -related job posting within all countries in the database.  The data provide a snapshot in time. Caution is advised when comparing different versions of the data, as the AI -related concepts identified by  the Machine Learning algorithm may evolve in time. Please see methodological note  for more information.   Source: OECD.AI (2021), visualisations powered by JSI using data from Adzuna .com, accessed on 25/10/2021, www.oecd.ai .      0.0%0.5%1.0%1.5%2.0%2.5%Probability of appearance in a single IT job posting
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   29  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Box 2.1. Using AI to assess occupational prospects: Bakhshi et al.   Bakhshi et al. (2017 [9]) use a mixed -methods approach to predict employment growth by occupation  until 2030 in the United States and the United Kingdom. Their method combines expert human  judgement with Machine Learning . First, during foresight workshops, panels of experts were invited to  debate the prospects of 30 occupations, and label each occupation according to their view of its future  demand prospects (grow, stay the same, shrink), as well as their level of confide nce in their responses.  This exercise was performed in three rounds of ten occupations. The first set of ten occupations was  chosen randomly, but the subsequent sets of occupations to be labelled were chosen by an algorithm.  Next, based on the information on the 30 labelled occupations and an existing skills -occupation  mapping (O*NET), the researchers trained a Machine Learning  classifier to generate predictions for all  occupations and 120 skills. They predict that around 10% of the workforce are in occupat ions that are  likely to grow as a percentage of the workforce. Particularly education, health care, and wider public  sector occupations are likely to grow. Around 20% are in occupations that will likely shrink, and roughly  70% of people are currently in jo bs for which predictions are too uncertain.     2.1.2.  …and  facilitate  skill profiling   9. To plan training provision, the information on skill demand need s to be compared with an  assessment  of individual capabilities through so -called ‘skills profiling exercises’. Ski lls profiling is  often used by public and private employment services to compare jobseekers’  skills against  available jobs. In its simplest form, it consist  of looking at people’s  level and field of formal education  as well as their previous  work experienc e. In more advanced systems, direct and indirect skill  testing are also used. AI has the potential to  improve skills profiling in several ways. Thanks to the  ability  to automatically categori se vast amounts of descriptions of education programmes  and  occup ations into skill categories , AI has the potential to  translate information on occupation and  education background into a profile of individual knowledge, skills and abilities , which the individual  can usually adjust as necessary  (see Box 2.2). AI can also help integrate additional information  with the potential to make predictions more precise. For instance, it can help categor ise vast  amounts of manually  imputed text describing tasks carried out in everyday life or detailing content  of non -formal training courses and feed the information into the adult’s skills profile  (see Box 3.5 in  the next chapter ). In summary, using AI might make it easier to build an individual’s  skill profile and  compare it to the skills required in available  jobs.   
30  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Box 2.2. Using AI  to infer skills from job titles : Clustree   Using a career dataset with over 58 million job titles , including 80% that are  unique , Clustree  built Deep  Learning networks to categor ise textual content such as job descriptions or job ads  into skills . They   deduce complementary  skills by analysing the skills other people with a similar job  have, as well as the  skills that are developed during the current position by analysing the skills of people with similar  experience. This helps individuals build their sk ill profile based on their job and work experience. They  can add or adjust the skills suggested by the algorithm as needed . Moreover, they  may be directed to  the jobs in their organi sation that best match their skills , find the skills they may need to deve lop further  to make the next step in their career, or receive training suggestions in the skills that are most commonly  developed by people in similar positions . For employers , Clustree ’s solutions facilitate workforce  planning, career development and inte rnal mobility, and discovering talent.   Source: https://www.clustree.com/ .    2.2. Matching: using AI to map available training courses  into skill units   10. Identifying appropriate training opportunities based on skill gaps requires a reliable mapping of  what skills are developed in each training programme. This can be a particularly challenging task  in countries with a very fragmented training market, characterised by a large number of training  providers offering a wide vari ety of courses. AI can help structure this information, by automatically  categori sing (online) descriptions of training programmes into skill categories  (see Box 2.3). It can  then match individuals to training, based on their current or future skill needs. In several OECD  countries, public and private employment services have started experimenting with using AI to  match job seekers to jobs and training.  In Korea, for example, an AI -powered job recommendation  service  called The Work  analy ses job seekers ’ CVs, their past training experience, any funding or  grants already received, and their own areas of interest , in order to find relevant vacancies for them  (OECD, 2021 [10]; OPSI, 2021 [11]). AI also enables an objective assessment of the quality of the  match between candidates and jobs, e.g. as a share of skills in commo n. 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   31  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Box 2.3. Using AI  to provide tailored training recommendations: Boostrs   Using online descriptions of education and training programmes, Boostrs  applies Natural Language  Processing algorithms to transform the descriptions automatically into pre -defined skill categories,  thereby creating a mapping of skills -to-training. They combine various existing repositories of job  descriptions and skills in jobs (e.g. ESCO, O*NET, ROME) to create a comprehensive skills -to-jobs  mapping. Combined, these two mappings inform users who want to change jobs about the  skills they  may need to improve or acquire, and wh at training programmes are likely to teach those skills. Boostrs   also inform s users which jobs best match their skills, and aims to facilitate job transitions by  pointing  users  to relevant career paths, for instance by indicating which jobs are most similar to their current one  in terms of skills. They can also analyse trends in jo b or skill demand and identify hard -to-fill positions  within organ isations, in order to inform hiring managers and policymakers about current and future skill  needs.   Source: https://boost.rs/en/ .  2.3. Training content  and assessment: using AI to tailor content and adapt it to  the user ’s progress   2.3.1.  Overcoming  the one -size-fits-all barrier through AI   11. Non-AI training typically requires all students to go through the same learning materials,  irrespective of their abilities , preferences  or learning styles . Even though many efforts for   personalised learning exist, it remains practically impossible to adjust learning content to every  individual student, due to limited  human and financial resources. When training content  is drive n  by AI , it can be adapted to the individual  starting level and the progress achieved during the course .  By linking content to assessments or reading time , for instance , AI can suggest skipping certain  content, or providing additional learning materials when the student appears to be struggling.    12. Finally, AI -powered online platforms can provide relevant suggestions for learning content . This  requires an analysis and automatic categori sation of the content , on the one hand , and of the  individual ’s learning  goals and preferences , on the other. T he AI system may  then recommend  specific  reading materials, webinars, videos , or training programmes  that are tailored to the  individual . There are various interesting examples of initiatives and experiments in formal  education  regarding personalisation of learning based on students’ knowledge, progress or curriculum level  (OECD, 2021 [12]). Box 2.4 and Box 2.5 provide examples related to non -formal learning.  
32  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Box 2.4. Using AI  to provide suggestions  for training content : eDoer   While every education and tra ining programme consists of learning content (e.g. reading materials,  lectures or videos), learning content can also be provided irrespective of a specific programme , such  as Open Educational Resources (OERs). eDoer , an on -going research project run by  Technische  Informationsbibliothek (Germany) and the University of Amsterdam (the Netherlands), aims to use AI  to automatically extract topics from OERs, in order to provide relevant suggestions to individuals who  want to acquire certain knowledge or skills.   The researchers collected over 100 online lectures related to Machine Learning , text mining and SQL  language from Coursera and Khan Academy – two large online OER providers – as well as 550  educational videos from Youtube in the area of data science. Thanks  to AI and speech recognition  software, videos of online lectures and educational videos are transcribed  automatically , and advanced  Machine Learning  techniques are used to extract topics from the video transcriptions. When users  search for a topic they wa nt to learn about, they automatically receive suggestions for related online  learning content. In the current version, eDoer  only provides content suggestions for data science  related skills, but the researchers aim to apply their approach to other skills  in the future.   Source: (Molavi, Tavakoli and Kismihók, 2020 [13]).  2.3.2.  Adapting training through continuous assessment   13. AI-based assessment  makes it possible to adjust the type and difficulty of exercises to the  individual’s skills and progress. For instance, AI systems can provide additional exercises when  the student shows difficulties completing them, or move on to other topics or exercises that are  more difficult when the student shows they master the s ubject at a certain level. AI -based  assessment thereby diverts  from ‘stop and test’ assessments in which all students take the same  90-minute exam  (Luckin, 2017 [14]). Moreover, with AI -based assessmen t it becomes possible to  track the steps taken towards the correct or false answer  and analyse the response strategies ,  because the AI system can compare them to all potential steps and responses.  This expands  teachers’ understanding of why a student fails certain tasks or questions, allowing them to adjust  their teaching accordingly. However, the possibilities of AI -based assessment are not restricted to  written tests. It is also possible to use AI  for speech assessment such as in language training  (see  Box 2.5), or for expression analysis such as in soft skills training.  Ultimately, using AI for training  may impl y that learning and assessment will merge.  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   33  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Box 2.5. Using  AI for adaptive language training: Duolingo    Duolingo  is a language learning application that leverages AI to provide their over 300 million users with  tasks that are tailored to their level and development.  Users start out by taking a placement test. This  test adapts the subsequent tasks based on whether the user has completed the previous one correctly  and the difficulty of that task. As the user progre sses through the placement test, the AI system refines  its assessment of the language proficiency of the user. It can typically determine the user’s initial  language proficiency in less than five minutes. The placement test allows the more proficient users  to  skip the easiest tasks, thereby preventing them from dropping out due to under -stimulation.   Once the user starts the training programme at the determined level, AI not only determines which tasks  should come next in order to increase proficiency, but it also determines the optimal time interval  between task repetitions. Task repetition is important for retention  when learning a foreign language ,  as recently learned or more advanced concepts may need shorter time intervals than basic language  principles. AI-powered speech recognition also make it possible to assess the users speaking skills.  Game-like features, challenges and reminders are built in w ith the aim to increase motivation.  Since  language learning in Duolingo is broken up into little exercises of about 5 to 15 minutes per day, t he  application  provides flexibility for the users regarding when and where they learn .  Source: https://www. duolingo.com/ .    2.4. Training delivery : innovative delivery channels powered by AI   14. An increasingly popular  and affordable mode of training delivery is through extended reality.  Training solutions that make use of extended reality are typically powered by AI. There are two  main  types of extended reality:   i) Augmented reality (AR), which merges the real and virtual world, allowing trainees to learn  while looking at real objects surro unding them. For instance, by moving their tablet or  smartphone in front of an object, the trainee’s screen  would show  both the object and text,  visualisations or sounds related to it. Trainees  can also use eyeglasses that project the  visualisations.    ii) Virtual reality (VR), which creates a fully immersive virtual environment. Standard VR systems  use a headset that allows the user to look and move around and interact in a fully virtual world.  The headsets usually provide auditory and video feedback . Some  devices also provide haptic  feedback .   Tools and technologies using both AR, VR and the real environment  are typically referred to as  mixed reality (MR) . For instance, MR welding training lets students practice their welding skills by  physically holding a (fake)  soldering iron and applying it to a surface, while the video and audio  feedback through the headset gives the student a realistic welding experience. Combined, AR, VR  and MR training are referred to as XR training. Although AI is not strictly necessa ry to create XR  training, it can make the learning experience more life -like and interactive. For instance, the use of  AI in XR training enables the possibility to use voice commands, animations can respond in real  time, information about objects can autom atically pop up, and the user can use their hands to  interact with the content.   15. AI-powered conversation agents, better known as chatbots, can answer  work -related  questions  people  would otherwise ask their colleagues  (see Box 2.6). Chatbots are also increasingly used 
34  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  within training programmes, where they can provide the student with relevant learning materials,  quiz them to test their knowledge, or provide tips on how t o solve a task. When the algorithm behind  the chatbot is sophisticated enough, its questions and responses  and the way it talks  can seem so  natural  that it is similar to chatting with a human  colleague or teaching assistant . By transferring  knowledge, and in some cases learning content , chatbots  have the potential to be a delivery  channel  of informal learning in the workplace  that is more easily scaled -up than  learning informally  from humans.   Box 2.6. Using AI fo r informal learning: Bob the Bot   In many organ isations,  work -related information and knowledge is spread across various  sources ,  making it difficult for employees to find the information they need, even when the question is relatively  simple and frequently  asked. This is particularly challenging for workers  whose native language is  different from the language at work . Sodexo‘s  Bob the Bot is an example of how AI can help employees   quickly and easily find the information they need  in their own language , by starting a conversation with  Bob, a chatbot  which is currently available in 1 3 languages .   Initially implemented to guide the transition to a new performance appraisal structure, Bob gives  Sodexo’s employees  a single point of entry for their questions  on topics such as f eedback,  competencies, objectives, process es, or learning recommendations . The bot learns and enriches itself  thanks to the questions sent by employees and the answers created by the platform administrators.  It  thereby serves as an enha nced FAQ platform, where – thanks  to AI – the questions and answers are  automatically and continuously updated and users are guided towards the answer they are looking for ,  even if their question is less frequently asked .   The developers have tried to enha nce workers’ feeling s of engagement with the bot by making it more  “human”, e.g. by giving it a name and an avatar, teaching it to tell jokes from time to time and apolog ise  when it makes a mistake. Since the introduction of Bob the Bot , the number of emai ls to HR and support  staff has decreased significantly, freeing up time  for them  to focus on  the questions that are more  complex .   Figure  2.3. An avatar may help enhance workers’ feelings of engagement with the bot     Photo credit ©  Sodexo .    Source  : Expert consultations.   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   35  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  This chapter  presents the opportunities  that AI brings about when it is  leveraged to improve the adult learning process. More specifically, it  discusses how AI has the potential to  reduce some participation barriers,  build motivation to train, and broaden access to vulnerable groups  in the  labour market . It also outlines how AI may make  adult learning more  effective by improving its alignment with changing skills needs. Finally, it  highlights ways in which AI may help reduce bias and discrimination.      16. This chapter takes stock of the ways in which AI has the potential to  help improve adu lt learning  processes, breaking up its impact into the four major positive outcomes it may help achieve,  namely: increasing training participation ; making adult learning more inclusive; improving  alignment to emerging skill needs and reducing bias and disc rimination  (see Figure  3.1).  3.  How using AI for training may  improve adult learning system s  
36  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Figure  3.1. AI’s potential to improve adult learning systems     Source: OECD Secretariat.   3.1. Increasing training participation   17. Considering the fast -changing demand for skills on the labour market,  adults  will need to participate  in learning activities throughout their working lives  in order to remain productive and employable .  However, despite the high urgency, adults’ participation in learning activities is relatively low,  particularly among vulnerable groups  in the labour market . On average across OECD countries,  41% of adults participate in formal or non -formal job -related tr aining in a given year but in some  countries training participation is as low as 16%  (see Figure  3.2). In order to close existing skill  gaps on the labour market and pre vent new ones from emerging, it is crucial to find effective ways  to motivate more adults to participate in job -related education and training. AI tools for training have  unique features that may lower existing barriers to training participation and increa se motivation to  participate in learning activities, particularly among currently underrepresented groups.    Increasing training  participation •Lowering  participation barriers •Adapting time and  place of training •Shortening training •Building emloyer  support •Increasing  motivation •Tailoring  recommendations •Raising aspirations •Improving the  learning experienceImproving  inclusiveness •Tackling specific  needs of under represented groups •Non-native speakers •Low-skilled •Low educated •Adults with  disabilitiesImproving alignment to  changing skill needs •Assessing changing  skill needs •Mapping training  content •Matching people to  trainingReducing bias and  discrimination •Enhancing empathy  training •Reducing bias in  assessment
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   37  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Figure  3.2. Adults' participation in learning activities   % of adults participating in formal and non-formal job -related learning in the 12 months before the survey     Source : Survey of Adult Skills (2011/12, 2014/15, 2017/18).     18. One in five adults who do not participate in training (11% of all adults) indicate that they actually  wanted to participate in  training, but did not because they faced barriers. That means that they do  not necessarily lack motivation to train, but the opportunity for doing so. The most common barriers  for training participation are shortage of time due to work (2 9%) or family rea sons (15%), lack of  financial resources (16%) inconvenient time or location of the learning opportunity (12%) and lack  of employer’s support (7%)  (see Figure  3.3). Certain AI tools for training have the potential to lower  some of these barriers , thereby  increas ing training participation .  Figure  3.3. Barriers to participation in adult learning   Reasons for non -participation (% of adults who wanted to participate but did not)     Note: Average across  OECD countries participating in the Survey of Adult Skills .   Source : Survey of Adult Skills (2011/12, 2014/15, 2017/18).     0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70% 28.6% 16.1%15.3% 11.8% 6.9% 4.2%3.3%13.8% 0%5%10%15%20%25%30%35% Too busy at workToo expensive No time: family reasonsInconvenient time or placeLack of employer's supportUnexpected eventsLack of prerequisitesOther reasons
38  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  3.1.1.  Adapting t ime and place  of training delivery   19. Training that is available at any moment during the workday  or in an asynchronous manner   (i.e., where there is no live interaction between students and instructors) , and training that is  available outside of the workplace or classroom , have the potential to attract non -participating  adults who reported that trainin g was delivered at an inconvenient  time or place , who face time  constraints or lack the support of their employer . ‘Regular’ (non -AI) online or distance learning  addresses these barriers, by making training ava ilable at any place , and at any time (although the  latter depends on the type of online learning) . However, on average only 19% of adult learners  takes  part in non-AI online  training  (OECD, 2019 [1]), and in some countries even less than 10%  (OECD, 2021 [15]). One reason for the relatively low participation in online or distance learning may  be that there currently is a trade -off between having a t eacher and fellow students to interact with  in the online environment during class, and being able to follow the training any time you want.  Interactive online learning  still ties the individuals to a pre -defined timetable , and the asynchronous  options  consist of pre-set training files such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs)  that do  not allow for any tailoring or interaction . AI has the potential to add value to asynchronous training  where there is no live interaction, by replacing feedback from an inst ructor with chatbot functions .  Another reason for the low use of online  training  programmes may be  that they tend to focus on  skills needed in white -collar jobs (OECD, 2020 [16]). Using AI for training delivery  can extend online  training to  crafts -related occupations and training involving a work -based component. Moreover, it  allows for providing informal learning online  (more on this below) .  20. Job-related training for blue -collar jobs often includes a work -based component, which is not easily  delivered  through regular online training.  The increasing use and availability of extended reality  technologies opens up possibilities to provide online tr aining to blue -collar workers as well.1 The  vast majority of example s of XR training for adults are designed for crafts -related occupations, such  as mechanics, welders, or butchers, and in the manufacturing or transportation industry, such as  car manufactu rers or the aviation industry. Nevertheless, examples of XR training for soft skills   also exist (see  Box 3.1).                                                   1 Note that, a lthough AI is not strictly nece ssary to create XR training, most XR training is powered by AI, because AI  can make  the XR learning experience more life -like and interactive.  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   39  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Box 3.1. Using AI for soft skills XR training: VirtualSpeech   One example of a provider of VR soft skills training is VirtualSpeech, which combines e -learning with  VR training and web -based simulations so students can learn from experience in realistic immersive  scenarios. Their VR courses range from public speaking and job interview preparation, to business  ethics and managing workplace stress. Students often complete a series of videos, quizzes, slideshows  and case studies through the online platform before practic ing what they learned with VR scenarios.  Thanks to AI, users can receive instant feedback on their performance, including information about their  eye contact, tone, volume and speaking pace.   The main difference with ‘traditional’ soft skills training such  as e-learning modules or re -enacting  scenarios with actors, is that the VR training decreases the cognitive effort needed to imagine how one  would react in the real -life situation (Bertrand et  al., 2018 [17]). For instance, it can be hard to imagine  how one would truly react in front of a crowd of hundreds or thousands of people; a scenario that would  be very costly to replicate in real life, but that can be replicated in VR.  Although the VR experience  in  this example may still not be identical to the one in real -life, it does reduce the cognitive effort of  imagining facing a crowd. Moreover, the scenarios are more easily customised to the individual’s  specific learning goals. Yet, since the customisati on does not depend on human trainers or actors, the  quality of the training is the same for all students.   Figure  3.4. AI automatically provides objective feedback during VR soft skills training     Photo credi t © VirtualSpeech Ltd.     Source: (Beqiri and Barnard, n.d. [18]).    21. XR training makes it possible to participate in practice -oriented  training online , meaning  that, in  theory,  XR training is available outside of working hours  and outside of the workplace or classroom.  Although it appears that this type of training is mostly provided  within the workplace, it does allow  the indiv idual to learn more flexibly than before. For instance, instead of registerin g for a course  about  a new type of machine engine  on a fixed day and time , it is now possible to learn how the  engine  works and how to repair it at any time during the workday through XR . Moreover, by  
40  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  providing training in a virtual rather than a physical environment, individuals can acquir e skills  through practice -oriented  training in a completely safe environment  where they cannot get  physically injured  (see Box 3.2). They thereby develop skills, muscle memory and confidence  before applying their skills in the real world, which may prevent accidents . For people who suffer  from fear of failure, the safe environment of XR training may have emotional benefits as well. Even  though physical and emotional risks are not often mentioned as barriers to training participation,  creating safer training environme nts, where errors and mistakes are seen as part of the learning  experience,  may motivate individuals to participate in training. In fact, the absence of physical and  emotional risks are often mentioned as one of the  biggest advantage s of XR training provis ion.  Box 3.2. Using AI in XR training to eliminate physical risks: FLAIM   FLAIM is a fully immersive VR training for firefighters and first aid responders that allows them to learn  how to fight fires in safe, rea listic, dynamic virtual environments. AI makes it possible to mimic real fire  behaviour including movement, smoke, water, foam and explosions. The virtual experience becomes  even more life -like thanks to heat suits that replicate the likely temperature in each scenario, by tracking  the individual’s proximity and orientation to the fire. FLAIM Training can also replicate the force felt from  the hose, and simultaneously measure the heart and respiration rate of the trainee.   Since VR fire training eliminates t he physical risks students and trainers face during real -life training, it  becomes possible to practice even the most dangerous scenarios, and as often as needed. Previous  studies have shown that fire training alone constitutes a major portion of some fire fighters’ occupational  exposures to smoke (Fent et  al., 2019 [19]). Moreover, VR fire training is environmentally friendly, as it  has no carbon emissions, PFA discharge or water consumption.   Figure  3.5. AI mimics real fire behaviour during VR fire training     Photo credit © FLAIM Systems Pty Ltd.     Source: https://flaimsystems.com/ ; (FLAIM, 2020 [20]).    22. Another way in which AI has the potential to  extend the provision of  online learning , and thereby  participation in learning activities , is by expanding the  opportunities for informal learning  online .  Traditionally, informal learning takes place during business hours in the physical workplace,  because it includes learning from others, learning by doing and learning about new things at work .  Informal learning  is by far the most common form of learning in the workplace : it is estimated that  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   41  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  approximately 80  to 90% of all learning in the workplace is informal  (Borghans et  al., 2014 [21];  Fialho, Quintini and Vandeweyer, 2019 [22]). However, recent OECD calculations show that,  due to   the COVID -19 pandemic , the shutdowns of economic activities it caused  in some sectors and the  transition to remote working (teleworking) practices in others,  workers’ participation in  informal  learning could have decreased by as much as 25% (OECD, 2021 [23]). Since the COVID -19  pandemic may catalyse a wider adoption of teleworking practices in the coming years (OECD,  2020 [24]), there is a risk that  access to  informal learning will be structurally lower than before. AI  tools for training delivery may be able to substitute some of the informal learning that is lost when  working remotely. First, because XR training allow workers to learn by doing . Even when XR  training is mostly provided in the workplace, it allows workers to engage  in informal learning without  depending on others’ availability to teach them. Second, AI -powered chatbots can answer   questions workers would otherwise ask their colleagues. Contrary to learning informally from others   at work, chatbots  are usually available any time and place , and to all workers at the same time .  3.1.2.  Shortening the learn ing process   23. Time constraints of potential training participants can also be addressed through s horter training  program mes or modules  (OECD, 2019 [1]). As discussed in the previous chapter, AI-powered  courses and assessment s allow the student to skip irrelevant tasks and modules, and only focus  on the specific modules the individual needs in order to improve the skills they need for their current  or future job . This  potentially shorten s the learning process. Moreov er, AI systems, having learnt  the user’s strengths, weaknesses and learning preferences, can suggest training courses and  modules that are most relevant for the employee.  See Box 3.3 for an example . 
42  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Box 3.3. Using AI for assessment: Iris   An example of adaptive skill assessment based on AI is Pluralsight’s Iris: an assessment algorithm  used to measure the proficiency in technolo gy skills, such as Java language, graphic design, or ethical  hacking. A network of expert practitioners continuously develops and adds questions to a question  database.   Each question served to the user is based on how the previous one is answered and its difficulty. Iris  infers the user’s skill level based on how they perform on the subsequent questions, and does so with  increasing confidence. The assessment ends when a statistically meaningful confidence level about the  user’s skill is reached. Doing so, the AI system provides consistent results in very little time: users  typically need 20 questions (10 minutes) to complete an assessment. The skill assessment score (‘Skill  IQ’) is also benchmarked against other users, which gives the user insights into the  skills for which they  have a comparative advantage, and the skills they may want to develop further.   Iris is also used to provide a ‘Role IQ’. A network including industry leaders continuously develops and  updates roles (similar to occupations) and the s kills associated to them. Based on how well other people  in a given role have previously performed on a given skill assessment, Iris can model the required skill  level for each skill in each role. When users select a role, they see the skills assessments r elated to  them. If they completed these assessments, they see their score and how it compares to the required  level for the role. A predictive Machine Learning model assigns the assessment score of the user to  one of three levels, i.e. novice (1st -20th per centile), proficient (21st -80th percentile) or expert (81st and  higher percentile).   Source: https://www.pluralsight.com/product/iris?exp=2 ; (Pluralsight, n.d. [25]).  3.1.3.  Building employer support   24. Although training participation increases productivity and profitability, only around 40% of firms with  at least 10 employees provide training to the majority of their employees (see Figure  3.6) and 7%  of adults who do not participate in training consider a lack of employer support the main reason for  not doing so (see  Figure  3.3 above ). New evidence from 100 case studies from five OECD  countries shows that lack of time is one of the most important reasons for employers not providing  training to their employees, followed by traini ng costs and negative attitudes of employees and  managers (OECD, 2021 [26]). AI tools for training may lower these barriers to training provision by  employers, thereby increasing individual participation in training.  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   43  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Figure  3.6. Participation of enterprises in the provision of adul t learning   Share of enterprises providing continuing vocational training (% of all enterprises) and coverage of provision (% of  training enterprises)     Note: Data for Chile refer to provision in the last two years, whereas data for other countries refer to  provision  in the last year. Excludes  enterprises with less than ten employees; Data for Japan excludes enterprises with  less than 30 employees. No data on coverage of training  provision is available for Chile, Japan and Turkey;  Latvian data on the percent  of enterprises providing CVT was considered unreliable and was  therefore  excluded.   Source : (OECD, 2019 [1])  25. As explained in the previous section, AI tools for training delivery, such as XR training and  conversation age nts, may  give workers more flexibility regarding where and when they learn   (during the workday) . Moreover, these AI tools allow them to learn independently, meaning that  they do not rely on the time and availability of fellow students, teachers or tutors. To some extent,  AI-powered or -enhanced training provision therefore has the potential to reduce time constraints  employers face when it comes to training provision.   26. AI tools for training also have the potential to reduce training costs for employers. First, using AI  for training, particularly XR training, may reduce training costs by limiting the waste of raw materials  and avoiding physical injuries during practice -oriented training (see Box 3.2 above ). Second, it may  reduce costs per participant by up -scaling training provision: compa red to class -based training,  AI-powered or -enhan ced training can reach many more students at the same time. While non -AI  online training allows for significant upscaling as well, AI -powered or -enhanced training has the  advantage to allow up -scaling training that is tailored to the individual. Without t he use of AI,  providing individually tailored training to large groups of people would require significant  investments in terms of time and money.   27. A third way in which AI tools for training may reduce training costs, is by making training  participation mo re efficient. For instance, based on large databases on individuals’ career moves,  the type of training they participated in and several background characteristics, AI -powered career  coaches are able to  give tailored advice regarding which training to foll ow in order to reach a set  career goal. Moreover, by running Machine Learning  algorithms over descriptions of education and  training programmes, it is possible to assess which training could be followed in order to fill certain  skill gaps within the firm. Combined, these AI tools for training have the potential to improve the  allocation of workers to training that best fit their spec ific skill needs, i.e.  potentially  improving the  worker -training match , and reducing the risk of workers following the “wrong”  training, by enhancing  
44  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  human career and training advisors’ training suggestions, and by guiding and empowering adults  with limited access to human career counselling due to time, financial or institutional constraints to  find the most relevant training fo r them.   3.1.4.  Increasing individuals’ motivation  to participate in training   28. The vast majority of adults who do not participate in training (80%; equal to 49% of all adults)  may  not have been able to identify training that suited their needs or did not see value in training : they  indicate that there was no training that they would have wanted to attend . Given its size, the  inclusion of this group in training  is crucial in policies attempting to increase participation overall.  AI has the potential to motivate curre ntly underrepresented groups in training, by providing tailored  training recommendations and assessments, raising aspirations and improving the learning  experience.   Tailor ing training recommendations  and assessment   29. One reason for people’s lack of motivation to participate in training may be that they consider that  the available training is not relevant  for them  or that they face difficulties navigating the available  options . Since this does not necessarily mean there are  no relevant training options available,  providing information and tailored training suggestions may help to increase participation. With the  help of AI, individuals can automatically receive tailored training recommendations , thereby  avoiding having to br owse through training catalogues in order to find the most relevant training  for  them , or scheduling a meeting with a career counsellor on a fixed day or time . Based on large  databases on individuals’ career moves  (for instance delivered by public employme nt services) ,  the type of training they participated in, and /or several background characteristics such as the  educational and occupational history, AI -powered career coaches are able to  give tailored advice  regarding which training to follow in order to r each a certain career goal. The type of AI-powered  career coaches  that currently exist are either targeted at the individual, thereby significantly  upscaling and expanding the availability of training and career advice, or to case workers in public   or priv ate employment agencies , with the aim of helping them more easily find the best training to  help job seekers  return to employment.   30. Not only do t ailored training recommendations help individuals find the most relevant training, they  also reduce the risk of participating in less relevant training, which could discourage people from  participating in training again. The same holds for tailored AI-assessment, which allows the student  to skip tasks and questions that are less relevant to them b ecause they do not match their learning  goals or their starting skills and competencies.   Raising aspirations   31. Personalised recommendations about career and training pathways may also help increase  participation by raising aspirations. Some people may not pa rticipate in training because they are  not aware of how this may help them progress in their career. Some AI-powered career coaches  highlight the benefits of training participation, for instance by automatically providing  an estimat e  of the potential wage increase after taking the suggested training , based on the user’s background  characteristics and the wage increase similar users experienced after participating  in that training  programme  (see Box 3.4). 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   45  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Box 3.4. Using AI to raise aspirations: Bob   Bob is an online career guidance tool that are provided free of charge by Bayes Impact, an international  NGO whose mission is to leverage digital technologies to create a new generation of public services,  and empower people at scale.  The AI system behind Bob makes it possible that millions of people can  receive tailored suggestions at the same time.   Bob leverages AI t o empower people to navigate their job search, by providing them with a personal ised  action plan and coaching that aim to help them overcome their barriers to employment. Bob first asks  its users several questions about themselves and their aspirations, su ch as their personal goals , what  having a job means to them , and whether they have any  diplomas or experience  that may be relevant  for their aspired job . Based on various data sources, including (amongst others) existing job  classifications, vacancy data and data on job seeker pathways and employment outcomes , the AI  system behind Bob provides several suggestions regarding the next steps the user may want to take in  order to reach their personal goal. Those that may not yet have the necessary experience or  diplomas  are not only suggested to participate in training, but they also receive an estimation of the expected  wage increase by doing so, as well as relevant training suggestions in their region.    Figure  3.7. The AI system behind Bob  provides the probability of a wage increase by  participating in training     Photo credit ©  https://us.hellobob.com/ .     Source  : Expert consultations .  Improving the learning experience   32. Some people  who lack motiva tion to participate in training  may find that the way in which training  is delivered does not fit their needs and preferences. For instance, some are reluctant to participate  in training in a classroom setting and prefer learning  by doing. For them, AI -powered XR training  might  be a solution, since it provides practice -oriented  training. Many XR training programmes also  have badging and rewards systems for performing certain activities, which add a playful element  to the training (i.e., gamification). It has been shown that providing instant feedback and rewards  through badges, leader boards and performance graphs foster feelings of competence (Sailer  et al., 2017 [27]; van Roy and Zaman, 2018 [28]; Rapp, 2017 [29]).  
46  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  3.2. Improving  the inclusiveness  of adult learning systems   33. Some groups of adults participate much less in adult learning activities than other s. Across the  OECD,  participation levels in adult learning are particularly low for  adults whose native language  is different from the one of their country of residence, those who have low skill levels or low levels  of educational qualifications, and those who are permanently disabled  (see Figure  3.8). This is  problematic since  there is no reason to assume that their upskilling needs are lower than average.  For some of these group s (particularly the low -skilled) the  retraining and upskilling needs are likely  higher  than average . Evidence on the increasing demand for people with high skill levels  as  opposed with declining job opportunities for  low- and medium -skilled adults abounds  as routine  tasks are automated or off -shored in advanced economies (OECD, 2019 [30]).   Figure  3.8. Adults' participation in learning activities, by subgroups   % of adults participating in formal and non -formal job -related learning     Note:  Average of OECD countries. ‘Non-native speakers’ are native or foreign -born individuals whose native language is different from the one  of their country of residence (Survey of Adult Skills). ‘Low skilled’ are individuals who score at level 1 or below on literacy or numeracy (Survey  of Adult Skills). ‘Low educated’ are individuals whose highest obtained qualification is at ISCED level 2 or below (Survey of  Adult Skills ). ‘Disabled’  are individuals who have  a long -standing health condition or illness  (EU-SILC). *These statistics are based on EU -SILC data, which does not  cover all OECD countries.   Source : Survey of Adult Skills (2011/12, 2014/15, 2017/18); EU Statistics on  Income and Living Conditions (EU -SILC) ad -hoc module (2016).   34. Certain AI tools for training have the potential to  encourage currently underrepresented groups to  participate in training, thereby improving the inclusiveness of adult learning systems. One way  to  engage currently underrepresented groups in training is by tailoring the programmes to these  groups’ specific needs. AI can help adjust tasks, assignments and suggested content to the  individuals’ needs  in a way a human teacher often cannot, due to tim e and budget constraints.   3.2.1.  Non-native speakers   35. Since XR training focuses on learning by doing, it has the potential to increase the inclusiveness  of training provision for non -native speakers such as immigrants, who may find it difficult to read  learning m aterial and participate in the course in a foreign language. Other ways in which AI can  Non -native  speakers Low skilled Low educatedDisabledNative  speakersMedium -high  skilledMedium -high  educated Not disabled* 0.0%10.0%20.0%30.0%40.0%50.0%60.0%
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   47  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  be used to engage non -native speakers in training is through its us e in automatic translations.  AI-powered technology that is similar to what is behind Google Translate  and voice commands on  smart phones makes it possible to translate reading materials as we ll speech automatically  (i.e. a teacher explaining something). Moreover, AI  can automatically classify foreign qualifications  into skill categories, which may decreas e one of the main barriers to employment of immigrants  and refugees (see Box 3.5 below ).  3.2.2.  Low-skilled individuals   36. One of the reasons for the low training participation rates among low -skilled adults is that they find  it more difficult to recognise their learning needs and hence are less likely to seek out training  opportunities (Windisch, 2015 [31]). According to data from the 2016 Adult Education Survey (AES),  only 11.6% of adults with low skills looked for information concerning learning opportunities ,  compared to 35.5% of adults with high skill levels (OECD, 2019 [30]). AI-powered career coaches  may help individuals  navigate available training programmes and select the ones that are most  relevant for them. They can also provide advice on how to tackle barriers to participation, for   instance by suggesting training programmes that are free of charge or available online (see Box 3.4  above for an example), or by directing them to adult  learning policies they are eligible for, such as  subsidies for training costs or training leave. Although human career coaches are able to perform  a similar task, AI can scale -up the exercise, and help human career coaches select the most  relevant trainin g programmes for their clients.   37. Another reason why low -skilled adults may not participate in training is that fear of failure impedes  them to participate (Fouarge, Schils and Grip, 2012 [32]). AI-powere d XR training provides a safe  learning environment where students can – and are often even encouraged to – make mistakes  without real -life consequences. This may be an effective way for people to overcome their fears.   38. Certain groups of adults, particularly  those with low levels of literacy proficiency, may benefit from  visual ising learning content and acquiring skills through learning by doing. AI -powered XR training  expands the availability of practice -oriented  training. Moreover, AR has the potential  to assist  lower -skilled workers in order to perform tasks that higher -skilled or specialised workers would  normally perform. For instance, instead of assigning a higher -skilled specialised worker to repair  complex pieces of machinery, AR can guide lower -skille d maintenance workers through the  performance of the same task. Although the individual does not necessarily perceive this type of  work assistance as training, it certainly includes a learning element (i.e., non -formal or informal  learning).  AI-powered AR work assistance thereby has the potential to decrease existing skill gaps  in high -skilled technical professions, as well as improve the employment opportunities of medium  and lower -skilled individuals.  
48  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Box 3.5. Using AI to build skill profiles: SkillLab   SkillLab  was founded in 2018 with the aim to develop technology -based solutions to help refugees  integrate into local labour markets . One of the key barriers to the employment of refugees is the difficulty  evaluat ing their skills, due to experience and qualifications from labour markets and education systems  that may be very different from the host country and for which documentation may be missing.  Moreover, refugees may find it hard to express their skills correc tly in the host country’s language.  SkillLab ’s app leverages AI with the aim to help refugees and others  vulnerable groups  overcome these  barriers.   Based on a short questionnaire, the AI system automatically generates a skill profile that can be  adjusted a nd completed as the job seeker sees fit. The questionnaire address the user’s education and  occupation history, as well as  their experiences in daily life, such as doing maintenance work, doing  groceries, or childminding. Machine Learning  techniques and ex isting descriptions of education  programs, occupations and activities, are used  to categor ise all experiences into skills. This not only  ensures that the skill profile is as complete as possible, but it may also empower homemakers  and  long-term unemployed to (re -)enter the labour market. Moreover, the app is available in 27 different  languages, allowing people to describe their skills in their native language and, with the help of AI,  automatically translate that information to the host country’s language.   Once the skill profile is complete, users receive AI -powered suggestions for occupations that best match  their skills. A detailed description of the extent to which their skills match to each of the required skills  in the occupations and benchmarking this  to other users’ matches, allows users to identify which skills  they may need to develop further. Moreover, users can automatically generate custom ised CVs that  are tailored to desired jobs.   Figure  3.9. AI p rovides suggestions for skills related to activities outside of work     Photo credit ©  SkillLab.   Source  : https://skilllab.io/en -us; (SkillLab, n.d. [33]).  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   49  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  3.2.3.  Low educated individuals   39. Although the terms are often used interchangeably, being low  educated is not necessarily the same  as being low  skilled . Low educated workers can face barriers to training participation because they  do not have the required diplomas, even when  they do have the  skills to be able to participate . This  is particularly problematic for people who have foreign qualifications that are not recogn ised in the  count ry of residence. T herefore, recognition of prior learning may increase training participation of  low educated individuals. With a certain margin of error, AI can automatically predict which s kills  people have, irrespective of their background and diplomas.  For instance, by running NLP  algorithms on education and training descriptions around the world, it becomes possible to assess  which skills individuals without nationally recogn ised diplomas have. It also facilitates assigning  skills to activities outside  of work, such as cooking, cleaning, childminding, gardening or  maintenance  (see Box 3.5).  3.2.4.  People with disabilities   40. Not only is the training participatio n of people with disabilities relatively low (see  Figure  3.8); those  who do participate in training are much less optimistic about the effectiveness of training  participation in terms of learning outcomes  than those without disabilities, even when taking into  account their labour market position (OECD, 2021 [34]). AI has the potential to help increase the  quality and accessibility of training for people with disabilities.    41. AI-powered text -to-speech technology facilitates  training participation to the visually impaired  who  may othe rwise not have access to the reading materials. Speech -to-text technology, on the other  hand, may increase the inclusiveness of the hearing impaired . For instance, XR heads -up displays  can provide users with real -time text captioning of conversations as we ll as other sounds, such as  a phone ringing  (see Box 3.6). Moreover, XR training and AI -based  content and assessment  increase the possibilities for distance learning, wh ich can be helpful for those who are physically  impaired  (OECD, 2021 [34]). For various examples of how AI and other technologies can assist  children and adolescents with special needs , see (OECD, 2021 [12]).  
50  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Box 3.6. Using AI to empower deaf and hard of hearing people: HoloSound   Aimed at people who are deaf or hard of hearing (DHH), HoloSound  uses speech -to-text techniques to  transcribe speech along with deep learning to identify non -speech sounds, as well as the direction of  sounds. HoloSound  overcomes many drawbacks of more common speech -to-text software, which is not  always able to caption non -speech sounds such as someone knocking on the door or a fire alarm going off  and requires the user to shift their focus away from the conversational partner or the environment to the  captioning screen. For instance, when DHH adults want to learn about how a machine engi ne works with  traditional software during practice -oriented training, they have to divide their attention between the  teacher, their screen and the engine, whereas other students can listen to the teacher’s explanation while  inspecting the engine.   With Holosound , the captions of all sounds and their directions are displayed on Microsoft HoloLens AR  glasses. This allows the user to see the real world with an artificial ‘overlay’, similar to subtitles: in this case  captions and a circular arc to indicate the  direction of the sound. HoloSound may thereby facilitate  workplace integration as well as training participation of DHH people.   Figure  3.10. AI automatically captions sounds, their identity and their directi on    Note: Panel A: Identification and captioning of speech and chopping sounds and their direction. Panel B: Identification and caption ing of a phone  alarm and its direction. Panel C: Captioning of multiple conversation partners and their  direction. Panel D: AR headset and microphone array.   Photo credit © (Guo et  al., 2020 [35]).    Source: https://makeabilitylab.cs.washington.edu/project/holosound/ .  3.3. Improving the alignment of training participation to labour market needs   42. In order to reduce and prevent  skill gaps on the labour market, not only is it important that people  participate in train ing throughout their working lives , they also need to participate in training that  helps them acquire the skills that are most in need. This requires high -quality  detailed  information  about wh at skills are needed in the labour market, wh at training programmes teach those skills,  and which  groups of  people need to  be targeted for  those programmes.  AI can automate and  potentially enhance some of these aspects.   3.3.1.  Assessing and anticipating skill needs in the labour market   43. In order to improve th e alignment of training to labour market needs, the first step is to know what  the skill needs are in the labour market. Countries use a range of methods and tools to assess and  anticipate their skill needs, including both quantitative and qualitative sour ces of information. 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   51  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Traditionally, a common quantitative source of information is employer surveys that include  questions about vacancies (OECD, 2016 [36]). With the increasing availability of large amounts of  vacancy d ata from online job postings, it becomes increasingly common to use AI to assess and  anticipate skill needs. With the help of AI, researchers can identify which skills employers are  looking for and whether skill needs change over time within and across occ upations, by analysing  job vacancy texts  (see Box 3.7). Compared to similar non -AI exercises, the potential advantages  of AI -driven skills assessment and anticipation a nalyses are that they are automated, scale -up,  and that they provide more timely and granular information for more narrowly defined occupations  and geographical locations.    Box 3.7. Using AI to assess and anticipate skill needs: Headai   Headai provides AI-enabled insight s into the demand and supply of skills at the  local, country, industry,  or global level . They use AI to transform vast amounts of vacancy texts and job descriptions into skill  categories, and predict current and future skill demand based on past labour market trends. Similarly,  AI is used to assess skill supply, by categorising vast amounts of descriptions of education and training  curricula into skills. By combining these two exercises, Headai can compare the skills produced in the  education and training system to the current and future demand for those skills in the labour market,  and provi de suggestions for curriculum adjustments.   Besides skill needs assessments, Headai offers a wide range of other skills -related tools that are text based, such as Duunikoutsi  – a digital learning tool for children and adolescents. In the application, an  AI-powered chatbot feeds the user tasks and challenges in the order that aims to increase motivation,  and then gradually guides to dig into more challenging topics. The bot identifies the user’s strengths  and interests, with the goal of inspiring and engagin g the user. The user learns to learn and to reflect  on the learning outcome, as well as to find out what skills should still be practiced.   Figure  3.11. AI can transform curricula and vacancies into measures of skill needs     Photo credit © Headai.     Source: https://headai.com/ ; (Headai, 2020 [37]).  3.3.2.  Creating training -skills mapping   44. In most OECD countries, many different adult learning programmes exist, delivered by a broad  range of providers, which makes it hard to find the training programme(s) that teach the skills in  need. AI has the potential to help individuals navigate the jung le of training offers by using NLP  algorithms on descriptions of education and training programmes, and transforming this into a  training -skills mapping. See Box 2.3 and Box 2.4 in the previous chapter for examples of how AI 
52  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  can be leveraged to automatically categorise education and training programmes into skill  categories.   3.3.3.  Matching  people to training   45. Once skill needs have been analysed and the training programmes that teach those skills have  been identified, the challenge is to connect this information to t he relevant target group –  e.g. people who need to acquire these skills becau se they need them in their current or future job.  As discussed above, AI -powered training suggestions have the potential to incentivise people to  self-select into the training programmes that will teach them the skills they need in order to remain  employab le. They may also assist PES caseworkers in placing unemployed individuals into training  courses that are likely to increase their chances of long -term employment. Boxes 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.3  and 3.5 all provide examples  of how AI can be used to match people to jobs and training.   3.4. Reducing bias  and discrimination  in the workplace   46. OECD societies and workforces have become increasingly diverse  over the past decades. For  instance, in many OECD countries, female labour participation has grown significantly,  employment rates of older workers are increasing , there are higher  numbers of immigrants and  people from ethnic minorities, and LGBTI people are more open about their sexual orientation and  gender identity , making them more recognisable as a sizeable share  of the workforce . Yet, these  and other minority groups often struggle to find employment, and those that do are more likely to  have lower quality jobs, or do not feel sufficiently included or respected in other ways (OECD,  2020 [38]). AI-powered training  has the potential to deliver training to enhance diversity and  inclusiveness in the workplace  as well as soft skills such as empat hy and social perspective in a  more impactful way.   3.4.1.  Enhancing empathy tra ining   47. One way to reduce bias and discrimination is to increase awareness of what kind of behaviour  is  (perceived as) discriminatory, and by eliciting empathy for marginalised groups  through training .  Due to its immersive nature  and the possibility to creat e full body ownership illusions , AI-powered  XR training provides the unique opportunity to  experience situations through other people’s eyes   – literally  (see Box 3.8 below ). Although the practice of eliciting empathy by encouraging individuals  to imagine others’ perspectives  is not unique to XR training  (e.g., role playing games  can be used  for the same pu rpose),  XR training significantly reduces the cognitive effort needed for these  exercises (Bertrand et  al., 2018 [17]).   3.4.2.  Reducing bias in teaching and assessment   48. Research has shown that when teachers gr ade exams, they may (subconsciously) favour students  with socio -demographic characteristics – such as gender or nationality – that are similar to theirs  (Feld, Salamanca and Hamermesh, 2016 [39]). Autom ating the as sessment of students through  AI-powered adaptive assessments or through XR training may reduce bias in education and  training. Reducing bias and discrimination in assessment may, in turn, motivate currently  underrepresented groups such as women , migrants or disabled people to participate in training.  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   53  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified       Box 3.8. Using AI in diversity and inclusion XR training: Equal Reality   The immersive learning experiences of Equal Reality  allow the user to “walk  a mile in someone else’s  shoes.” By wearing a VR headset and initially being placed in front of a mirror in the virtual environment,  a full -body experience is created: the user will feel like the character’s body is their own. The character  usually has a short bio and their characteristics depend on the learning goal of the course. Next, the  user enters different scenarios depending on the course they take. For instance, learners of the  “Unacceptable bias and behaviour” training enter  scenarios in which th ey experience verbal abuse from  colleagues and have their personal space invaded.   Thanks to the full -body experience, users  can learn what it is like to experience discrimination or  inappropriate behavio ur, and identify bias when they see it. They  can also  practice making decisions in  real time, and rehearse challenging conversations by experiencing the situation from the perspective of  multiple people. The aim of Equal Reality ’s immersive training programmes is to drive behavioural  change and help prevent unacceptable behaviour through a better understanding of what it feels like to  be the victim, and bystander intervention. Their off the shelf and tailored courses include (amongst  others): reducing bias and discrimination regarding gender, race, LGBT+, cul ture or disability; sexual  harassment; domestic violence and challenging conversations.   Figure  3.12. AI-powered VR empathy training creates a full -body illusion with the aim to enhance  empathy     Photo credit © EqualReality.com     Source: https://equalreality.com/ ;  (Equal Reality, 2021 [40]).  
54  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  4.  Potential drawbacks of using AI for  training and how they can be addressed   Despite its potential to address some of the barriers that adults face when  approaching training, the use of AI for training could in fact raise other  existing barriers and generate new ones. F or instance , people may be  unprepared or afraid of us ing this technology, smaller firms may not have  access to the required data and technologies to develop or adopt AI for  training, and there are important  ethical risks . This chapter describes these  potential drawbacks of using AI for training, and proposes  ways in which  they can be addressed .     49. The previous chapter show ed that using AI for training has the potential to improve adult learning  systems by increasing training participation  and inclusiveness , improving the alignment of training  to labour market needs, and reducing bias and discrimination in teaching, assessment and the  workplace in general.  However, despite its potential to address some of the barriers that adults  face when approaching training, the use of AI for training could in fact raise othe r existing barriers  and generate new  ones. It is possible that using AI for training may increase inequality in access  to training , it may significantly change the skill requirements in certain occupations, and there are  important concerns regarding ethica l and transparency issues. This chapter first discusses these  potential drawbacks of using AI for training and how they can be addressed. Next, it shows how   the expansion of AI tools for training is constrained by AI skills requirements and a lack of scien tific  evidence regarding the costs and benefits of AI tools for training .  
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   55  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  4.1. Decreas ing the  inclusiveness of adult learning systems   4.1.1.  Limited access to AI tools for training  for adults with low digital skills   50. In order to be able to use AI tools for training, i t is crucial that adults have the skills that are needed  to effectively work with or alongside them  (i.e., ‘skills for AI’). Skills for AI are unlikely to include the  more advanced AI-related digital  skills such as Machine Learning , but they may include basic digital  skills , such as using a computer or filling in online forms.  In some cases, skills for AI may include  intermediate digital skills as well, for instance in order to be able to mount a VR headset or solve  technical issues that ari se during AI ass essment.   51. Using AI tools for training or p articipating in training that is powered by AI therefore requires a  higher level of digital skills than  for instance participating in face -to-face instruction  or receiving  career advice from a human counsellor , or attending a non -AI online training course . For individuals  with low levels of skills for AI, such as older adults and the low -skilled more generally – who are  currently already underrepresented in adult learning participation (see Figure  3.8) – it may be hard  if not impossible to use AI tools for training. Moreover, low skilled individuals may not be as well  placed as their higher skilled counterparts to challenge wr ongful outcomes of AI systems, which  may increase their distrust (more on this in section Raising  ethical  below) and thereby decrease  their probability to use of AI too ls for training.   52. On average across OECD countries, more than a third of adults have low digital problem solving  skills  or have no experience with a computer  (see Figure  4.1). The risk that AI tools for training  decreas e the inclusiveness of adult learning systems for adults with low digital skills is particularly  prominent  in countries with large shares of adults  with low skill levels in these domains  or with pre existing low participation rates among these groups . Addressing this drawback requires upskilling  initiatives for the low -skilled.  The expansion of training programmes for digital skills is already high  on the policy agenda in most countries. The delivery of more training through AI technologies would  increase the urgency.     Figure  4.1. The share of adults with low digital skills   % scoring at level 1 or below on problem solving in technology -rich environments, have no experience with a  computer, or failed ICT core     Source : Survey of Adult Skills (2011/12, 2014/15, 2017/18).   0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%
56  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  4.1.2.  Increasing inequalities between large and small enterprises   53. Most AI tools require  vast amounts of data and data storage, as well as powerful computers and  access to high -speed wireless internet networks. Previous studies confirm that having access to  sufficient amounts of (high quality) data  (European Union, 2020 [41]), as well as having a data or IT  infrastructure and mechanisms for responsible data sharing in place  (Centre for Data Ethics and  Innovation, 2020 [42]) can be challe nging for employers who want to implement AI solutions.  Moreover, companies that already have access to large amounts of high -quality representative  data (e.g. multinationals and tech giants) are better placed to develop high quality AI tools. The  higher q uality products likely attract more customers, leading to even larger amounts of data.  Companies without access to large amounts of high -quality data may develop AI tools based on  lower quality or less representative data, leading to low quality or biased outcomes.   54. Another potential drawback of using AI for training is that, despite the fact that certain AI tools for  training that are available free of charge do exist (see Box 3.4 for an example) the implementation  costs of AI (cost of adoption and adapting operational processes, and a lack of external/public  funding) are considered one of the two core barriers to the uptake of AI technologies, besides skills  barriers (European Union, 2020 [41]). The exact costs of AI depend on a variety of factors including  the type of tool, the level of intelligence it uses, the performance of the algorithm, the complexity of  the solution and the amount of data needed (AnalyticsInsight, 2021 [43]). For instance, the software  developer EON offers AR/VR solutions from USD 1 500 to up to USD 150 000, depending on their   complexity (EON, 2021 [44]). Specialised  equipment (VR headsets and hand sensors) can be as  costly as USD 350 per kit (OCULUS, 2021 [45]).  55. Several experts acknowledge that implementing AI tools for training can be costly, particularly since  custom solutions are often necessary due to specific requests of the client as well as to relatively  few readily available (cheaper) off the shelf solutions. Moreover, successful implementation of the  tools may require hiring or upskilling staff in order t o have the necessary AI skills, which can be  costly for employers. Nevertheless, experts expect prices to decrease as the supply of off the shelf  AI tools for training is likely to increase in the near future. Moreover, even when more expensive  custom solu tions remain necessary, the benefits of the tools are likely to outweigh the costs. Yet,  SMEs may continue to find it particularly challenging to afford investments in AI tools for training,  which puts them at a disadvantage  and could exacerbate  already ex isting inequalities in access to  training .   56. When these  challenge s are not overcome  the use of AI tools for training and its benefits  will be  concentrated in a few companies and nations (OECD, 2019 [2]). Indeed, Figure  4.2 shows that,  across European countries, enterprises’ use of AI is concentrated in the largest companies.  In  order to ensure that the access to  AI tools for training is widespread rather than concentrated in a  few companies or nations, appropriate mechanisms for sharing AI knowledge may need to be put  in place (OECD.AI, 2021 [46]). This may include sharing of data, c ode, algorithms, models, research,  and know -how (e.g. open source tools and high -quality training datasets), while respecting privacy,  intellectual property and other rights. Increasing the diffusion of AI technology will also foster  competition, which may  spur innovation. Additionally, funding initiatives could be targeted for  enterprises that face more challenges when it comes to adoption.    57. Many OECD countries  have  introduced policy initiatives with the aim to encourage SMEs to  innovate and adopt AI. Exam ples include Finland’s AI Accelerator , the SME 4.0 Excellence Centres   in Germany, Korea’s AI Open Innovation Hub , Turkey’s SME programme KOBIGEL , and  Singapore’s AIMakerspace . Additionally, the European Commission invested EUR 20 million to  build the Europ ean Network of AI Excellence Centres ( AI4EU ), a European online platform that  allows the exchange of AI tools and resources  (OECD, 2021 [47]).   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   57  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Figure  4.2. Share of enterprises using AI, by size     Source: Eurostat (2020) [E_CHTB  ; E_BDAML  ; E_BDANL  ; E_RBTS] .  4.2. Changing skill requirements in jobs  related to training and recruitment   58. The introduction of AI in training may change the skill requirements in jobs  that are related to  training quite significantly, including teachers and trainers but also Human Resource managers. In  a context where reskilling adults in these jobs is perceived as too difficult or too expensive, the  status -quo of human -managed and -provided training may be preferred.   59. As the previous chapter illustrates, using AI for training implies that AI can perform certain tasks  that are traditionally human. For instance, teachers’ and trainers’ tasks to assess students’ skills  and design tests can also be performed by AI -powered XR training or AI -based assessment, and  the task of a career counsellor or PES case worker to provide relevant training suggestions to job  seekers can be per formed by AI -powered online career guidance tools.  Introducing AI t ools for  training may also  increase the demand for digital skills  in occupations related to training and  recruitment .  60. The fact that AI is able to  perform certain tasks that are traditionally human implies that time can  be freed -up for  other tasks . Although  some of the freed -up time may need to be spent on using or  interpreting the AI tools for training, time may remain for other  tasks as well. Changing tasks  requires a redesign of job content for teaching and career counselling professions, which is  challen ging if the current labour force does not possess the required skills . For instance, around  16% of teachers in Vocational Education and Training (VET) lack basic computer skills or have  poor digital problem  solving skills and around one in four do not feel  confident using digital  technologies in classroom teaching or for providing feedback to students (OECD, 2021 [48]).  61. Compared to AI, humans are better placed to perform creative or higher cognitive task s such as  critical thinking or making decisions in complex situations  (Holmes, Bialik and Fadel, 2019 [49]).  Moreover, although AI tools can be “human ised” (e.g. telling jokes or showing empathy), peopl e  may continue to want to be around and interact with humans, especially when they are facing  difficulties or distress. In light of these comparative advantages, it would be advisable that, for  instance, trainers and career counsellors use the time gained through AI tools for training to divide  more attention to adults  with more complex problems. This, in turn, would shift the fo cus of the skill  0%10%20%30%40%50%60% 10-49 employees 50-249 employees 250+ employees
58  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  needs in these occupations towards higher cognitive and social skills. For some, this may require  additional educ ation and training.    62. Many national AI policies emphasise retraining for those displaced by AI , in order to ensure a fair  transition as AI is deployed . For instance, Singapore has developed a guide to job redesign in the  age of AI (IMDA and PDPC, 2020 [50]), which emphasises the need for social dialogue about why  there is a need to transform jobs, what will need to be transformed (including social dialogue about  which tasks shoul d remain human), and how the transformation will happen.    4.3. Raising  ethical issues   63. Similar to the use of AI in general, and the use of AI for formal education (see (OECD, 2021 [12]),  using AI for adult learning can bring about important ethical issues. First, although the previous  chapter showed that AI has the potential to reduce bias and discrimination in the workplace, there  is a risk that AI also embeds  and scales -up pre-existing human biases (OECD, 2019 [2]), due to  biased data that feed into the algorithms. Without the proper mechanisms in place such as human  intervention and oversight, t his could for instance imply that adults who are currently  underrepresented in traini ng participation will receive fewer or lower -quality AI -powered training  recommendations than those who participate more often, thereby further increasing the  participation gap.   64. Additionally, many AI systems  are complex and difficult to understand and replicate. This lack of  explainability and transparency makes it hard for the final users to challenge wrongful outcomes of  AI, including algorithmic bias . In add ition, the lack of explai nability and transparenc y can  discourage adults from undertaking training that uses AI. People are unlikely to (want to) start using  AI tools for training when they do not trust that the tools are easy to use, that they provide high  quality unbiased output that is easy to interpr et, and that data are well protected and used in an  ethical and fair way . For instance, the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology  (NIST ) has  defined four fundamental propert ies for explainable AI systems (Phillips et  al., 2020 [51]):  i) Explanation: AI systems should deliver accompanying evidence or reasons for all their outputs ;  ii) Meaningful: AI systems should provide explanations that are meaningful or understandable to  individ ual users ; iii) Explanation Accuracy: The explanation should correctly reflect the system’s  process for generating the output ; iv) Knowledge Limits: The system should only operate under  conditions for which it was designed or when the system reaches suffic ient confidence in its output   (OECD, 2021 [47]).  65. Building trust in AI requires the development of trustworthy, human -centred AI. As set out in the  OECD AI Principles, trustworthy AI systems benefit peo ple and planet; uphold human rights,  democratic values and fairness; are transparent and explainable; robust, secure and safe; and are  operated by accountable entities (OECD, 2019 [2]). Previous studies have found that employers  consider a lack of rules and regulations around AI  a key barrier  to trustworthy AI deployment   (Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, 2020 [42]; European Union, 2020 [41]). One way to encourage  the development of trustworthy AI tools for training is therefore to put clear laws and regulations in  place regarding data and privacy protection. These could also include accountability  mechanisms  for outcomes of AI, and robust metrics for performance. For instance, the European Commission  has stated that AI technology used in educational and vocational training and those used for  employment, workers management and access to self -employm ent (e.g. CV -sorting software for  recruitment procedures)  are high -risk AI systems that will therefore be subject to strict obligations  before they can be put on the market . These obligations could include an adequate risk  assessment and mitigation systems ; high quality of the datasets feeding the system to minimise  risks and discriminatory outcomes; logging of activity to ensure traceability of results; detailed  documentation providing all information necessary on the system and its purpose for authorities  to 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   59  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  assess its compliance; clear and adequate information to the user; appropriate human oversight  measures to minimise risk; and high level of robustness, security and accuracy. T he regulation  could enter into force in the second half of 2022 in a transit ional period  (European Commission,  2021 [52]).  66. Another way to build trust in AI is to increase public understanding of what AI can and cannot do,  and to be transparent about when it is being used. The  latter is particularly important, considering  that many people are not aware that they are using AI -powered tools (Pega, 2017 [53]). Increasing  public understanding also includes understanding how specific AI tools work, i.e. how they  reach  certain outcomes and why. This does not necessarily include access to codes or datasets, which  are often too complex and subject to intellectual property , but it does imply that AI tools for training  need to be e xplainable and transparent . For instance, Finland’s AI strategy sets the goal to educate  the entire nation with basic AI – including people who are employed and the elderly – to build “civic  competence”. Finland’s Elements of AI  programme is a ten -hour Mas sive Open Online Course that  seeks to ensure that all citizens have a basic understanding of AI . While Finland initially targeted  the training of 1% of its population, the course attracted more than 100 000 participants,  representing more than 2% of the po pulation. This course is now provided in several official  languages in the EU and will soon be in all of them. Another course on the Ethics of AI was  launched in Finland in November 2020  (OECD, 2021 [47]).    67. Many OECD countries have introduced guidelines for trustworthy explainable AI that are largely in  line with the OECD AI Principles. Other examples include Australia’s AI Ethics Framework ;  Belgium’s online self -assessment tool to foster trustworthy A I specifically tailored to the public  sector; Colombia’s Ethics Framework for Artificial Intelligence ; Hungary’s AI Ethical Guidelines ;  Japan’s AI R&D Guidelines and AI Utilisation Guidelines ; and Scotland’s AI explainability  framework . At the EU level, th e European Commission’s independent AI High -Level Expert Group  (AI HLEG)  introduced Ethical Guidelines on AI  in December 2018  (OECD, 2021 [47]).  4.4. Barriers to the introduction and expansion of AI tools f or training   68. Assuming that the above -mentioned drawbacks can be addressed, expanding the use of AI tools  for training is constrained  by the supply of AI -specific digital skills needed to develop the tools (e.g.  Machine Learning , Data Structures or Natural Language Processing skills).  Additionally,  policymakers and employers may be reluctant to adopt AI for training purposes when it is not (yet)  proven that the potential benefits are met and that they are cost effective. This section discusses  these barriers to widespread AI adoption for training in turn.   4.4.1.  Having a sufficient supply of AI skills   69. In order to successfully develop AI solutions, employers may need workers with AI -specific digital  skills (‘AI skills’). The most prevalent AI skills include Machine Learning , Data Structures, Deep  Learning, Natural Language Processing, and Computer Vision . Across OECD countries the  demand for AI skills is increasing , and even though the demand is still relatively small (around 2%  of IT job postings currently re quire AI skills: see Figure  4.3), shortages are  already  emerging in a  subset of these  skills , notably in  Programming, Big data management and Machine Learning  or  modell ing skills  (European Union, 2020 [41]). Using “off the shelf” AI tools for training instead of  tailored ones may help reduce skill shortages , but even off the shelf solutions require a minimum  level of AI skills in order to be implemented correctly.  
60  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  Figure  4.3. Relative international demand  for Artificial Intelligence skills   Probability of appearance in a single IT job posting     Note:  This line chart shows the probability that the AI  skill ‘Artificial Intelligence’ appears  in an IT -related job posting (average across  the OECD   countries  included in the database) . The d ata provide a snapshot in time. Caution is advised when comparing diff erent versions of the data, as  the AI -related concepts identified by the Machine Learning  algorithm may evolve in time. Please see methodological note  for more information.   Source : OECD.AI (2021), visualisation s powered by JSI using data from Adzuna.com, accessed on 27/10/2021, www.oecd.ai .  70. Several studies on opportunities and challenges of AI conclude that a lack of staff with appropriate  skills is one of the key barriers to AI deployment  (Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation, 2020 [42];  European Union, 2020 [41]; McKinsey, 2018 [54]). Countries with education systems that are relatively  unresponsive to changing skill needs and with relatively few people willing to enrol in AI skills  courses may struggle to find enough people with AI skills to successfully expand the use of AI tools  for training. Increasing the supply of AI skills starts in initial education, but it should continue  throughout the working life, since the definition of AI skills is likely to change over time. For instance,  Figure  4.4 below shows that, even within the relatively short time period of six years, the demand  for Machine Learning  and python skills ha s gained in relative importance in AI -related jobs,  whereas data mining skill s have lost relative importance.   71. In Korea, the Ministry of Science and ICT established the ICT Innovation Squares  in Seoul and 13  regions. These Squares offers working -level AI education programs in conjunction with regional  industries. 600 professionals f rom 6 industry domains participated in this programme in 2020, and  industry domains were expanded to 12 areas in 2021 (OECD, 2021 [47]). Other policy initiatives to  increase AI skills include: establis hing formal education programmes on STEM and AI -related fields  (Australia, Finland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States); devising vocational training and  lifelong learning on AI -related programmes to help citizens keep up with technological and societal   changes (Finland, Singapore); providing financial and non -financial support to retrain and attract  top AI talent (Belgium, Canada, Turkey, United Kingdom); fostering academic partnerships  between public and private AI research institutions (Chile, Egypt, Korea, Germany, Turkey); and  monitoring the impact of AI on the labour market for policy intervention (Germany) (OECD,  2021 [47]).   1.0%1.2%1.4%1.6%1.8%2.0%2.2%
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   61  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Figure  4.4. Top 30 sk ills demanded in AI -related jobs     Note: The size of the skill -related keywords in the word cloud represents the relative (i.e. quantitative) importance among the top 30 skills in the  given year. The scale of the size relation between the most and least frequent skill plotted, is the same across both word clouds. The absolute  values of word sizes on the other hand do not provide a mean to compare frequencies across word clouds or years. The largest word in each  word cloud indicates the most frequent skill , relative to all other skills in the given top 30 distribution. Keywords in grey present AI skills. In 2012  and 2018, the frequency of the top 30 skills accounts for around 32% and 34%, respectively, of the frequency of all skills.   Source : Squicciarini an d Nachtigall (2021 [55]).  4.4.2.  Limited scientific evidence   72. Without rigorous and robust evidence about the effectiveness of AI tools for training , policymakers  and employers cannot make informed decisi ons that weigh the costs of these tools against their  benefits.  However, to date there is only a limited set of scientific papers addressing the question  whether AI tools for training are indeed significantly better than their non -AI or human alternatives.   For instance, Pricewaterhouse Coopers recently conducted an experiment where they evaluate  the effects of an in -house designed VR soft skills training module on inclusive leadership for new  managers, compared with the equivalent in an e -learning or classr oom-based setting. They found  that, compared to e -learners and classroom -learners,  those who took the training in V R  (‘v-learners’) were more focused and emotionally connected to the content during training, they  completed the module faster, and they were more confident to act on what they learned after  training. On top of those benefits, v -learning was estimated to be more cost -effective than  classroom or e -learning modalities when delivered at scale (PWC, 2020 [56]). Another example is  the study by (Vanlehn, 2011 [57]), who review ed experiments comparing the effectiveness of human  tutoring, computer tutoring, and no tutoring . He finds that, contrary to common belief, there is no  significant difference between intelligent tutor systems and human tutors in  terms of their  effectiveness.  A Danish study shows that two -thirds of students from social and healthcare  programmes who used VR for training find VR  a good supplement for regular teaching, and that  43% found learning outcomes to be better than in regular classes (Videnscenter for  Velfærdsteknologi, 2020 [58]).   
62  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  73. Public and private investments may be needed to encourage researchers to conduct more  evaluations on AI tools for training.  For instance, many OECD countries are starting to consider  experimental models or co -regulatory approaches. These approaches aim to allow  experimentation to better unders tand the effects of AI systems and provide controlled environments  to facilitate the scale -up of new business models. These take place in parallel to regulatory  approaches that help create a policy environment that supports the transition from research to  deployment of trustworthy AI systems. Other countries have established AI centres of excellence  to strengthen AI research capabilities and to create interdisciplinary research communities. (OECD,  2021 [47]).   
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   63  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  74. AI has the potential to improve adult learning systems. This is necessary, because the way we  work is changing rapidly, and yet only four in ten adults across the OECD participate in education  and training in any given year, and these numbers are even lowe r for vulnerable groups on the  labour market. Moreover, training quality remains an issue, and aligning training to labour market  needs and individuals’ career goals can be challenging. In this context, AI can improve significantly  on other technology -powe red training solutions and, in some case, it can also improve on some  aspects of human -provided services.   75. When AI is used for training, it can intervene at different stages of the adult learning process. In  preparation for training provision, it can help assess skill demand by facilitating the analysis of  emerging skill requirements up until the recent past through vast amounts of online vacancy data,  and the analysis of skill supply through skills profiling tools. Once skill gaps between individuals’  abilities and available jobs have been assessed, AI can help identify suitable training opportunities  to fill those gaps. Thanks to AI, the content of training can be tailored to individual needs and  continuously adapted to the progress achieved. Finally, AI c an help deliver training in innovative  ways, breaking physical and psychological barriers to training by providing safe environments for  experimentation and trial and error.   76. Drawing  on a review of the relevant literature  and discussions  with various expert s in the fields of   AI and training, this working paper takes stock of the potential opportunities and drawbacks of  using AI for training. By doing so, it  draws valuable m essages for policymakers, public and private  employment services and firms that are co nsidering introducing AI tools in the training they offer.   77. Using AI for training has the potential to increase training participation, including among currently  underrepresented groups, by lowering some of the barriers to training people experience and  increasing training motivation. Moreover, certain AI solutions for training may improve the  alignment of training to labour market needs, and reduce bias and discrimination in the workplace.  Nevertheless, the potential benefits of AI tools for training notwit hstanding, there are also important  potential drawbacks of using AI for training, such as the risk of decreasing the inclusiveness of  adult learning systems due to the digital skills that are needed to use the tools, and the large  amounts of data and high -quality technological infrastructure needed to develop AI tools. Using AI  for training may also lead to significant changes in skill requirements in jobs related to training and  recruitment. Moreover, AI brings about important ethical issues.   78. Realising AI’ s full potential and ensuring that using AI for training has beneficial outcomes for all,  requires more research and policies that address the need for digital skills, the costs of adoption,  and the development of trustworthy, human -centred explainable AI tools for training. Indeed, many  OECD countries have already started to introduce policy initiatives to expand training programmes  for digital skills (including but not limited to AI skills); encourage SMEs to innovate and adopt AI;  offer retraining opport unities for those displaced by AI; provide guidelines for trustworthy  explainable AI that are largely in line with the OECD AI Principles; and facilitate experimental  models or co -regulatory approaches to formally test and better understand the effects of AI  systems. Considering that, when AI is used for training, it may determine the professional course  of someone’s life, it would be advisable that future policy and research pay special attention to AI  applications in this domain.  5.  Conclusion  
64  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  References     AnalyticsInsight (2021), How much does Artificial Intelligence Cost in 2021? ,  https://www.analyticsinsight.net/how -much -does -artificial -intelligence -cost-in-2021/  (accessed  on 1 September  2021).  [43]  Bakhshi,  H. et  al. (2017), The future of skills: Employment in 2030 ,  https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/the_future_of_skills_employment_in_2030_0.pdf   (accessed on 21  September  2021).  [9]  Beqiri,  G. and D.  Barnard (n.d.), VR for Soft Skills Training ,  https://virtualspeech.com/reso urces/whitepaper/vr -soft-skills -training -whitepaper.pdf   (accessed on 15  September  2021).  [18]  Bertrand,  P. et al. (2018), “Learning Empathy Through Virtual Reality: Multiple Strategies for  Training Empathy -Related Abilities Using Body Ownership Illusions in Embodied Virtual  Reality”, Frontiers in Robotics and AI , Vol.  5/MAR, p.  26,  http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/FROBT.2018.00026 . [17]  Borghans,  L. et al. (2014), Werken en leren in Nederland , ROA Reports,  http://dx.doi.org/10.26481/umarep.2014003 . [21]  Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation (2020), AI Barometer Report ,  https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_dat a/file/894170/CDEI_AI_Barometer.pdf  (accessed on 25  June  2021).  [42]  EON (2021), EON vault , https://vault. eon-xr.com/Products/Type/2  (accessed on  12 November  2021).  [44]  Equal Reality (2021), Partner Wiki - Photos ,  https://sites.google.com/equalreality.com/partner/media/photos  (accessed on  29 September  2021).  [40]  European Commission (2021), Regulatory framework proposal on artificial intelligence ,  https://digital -strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory -framework -ai (accessed on  10 November  2021).  [52]  European Union (2020), European enterprise survey on the use of technologies based on  artificial intelligence , http://10.2759/759368  (accessed on 25  June  2021).  [41]  Feld,  J., N.  Salamanca and D.  Hamermesh (2016), “Endophilia or Exophobia: Beyond  Discrimination”, The Economic Journal , Vol.  126/594, pp.  1503 -1527,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ ECOJ.12289 . [39] 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   65  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  Fent,  K. et al. (2019), “Firefighters’ and instructors’ absorption of PAHs and benzene during  training exercises”, International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health , Vol.  222/7,  pp. 991-1000, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHEH.2019.06.006 . [19]  Fialho,  P., G.  Quintini and M.  Vandeweyer (2019), “Returns to different forms of job related  training:  Factoring in informal learning” , OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working  Papers , No.  231, OECD  Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/b21807e9 -en. [22]  FLAIM (2020), FLAIM Trainer , https://cdn.flaimsystems.com/wp content/uploads/2020/05/28013748/Trainer -MARKET -Brochure -Final.pdf  (accessed on  15 September  2021).  [20]  Fouarge,  D., T.  Schils and A.  Grip (2012), “Why do low -educated workers invest less in further  training?”, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2012.671926 , Vol.  45/18, pp.  2587 -2601,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2012.671926 . [32]  Guo,  R. et  al. (2020), “HoloSound: Combining Speech and Sound Identification for Deaf or Hard  of Hearing Users on a Head -mounted Display”, ASSETS 2020 - 22nd International ACM  SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility ,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3 373625.3418031 . [35]  Headai (2020), Future -proofing Skills with Open Data and Semantic AI . [37]  Holmes,  W., M.  Bialik and C.  Fadel (2019), Artificial intelligence in education : promises and  implications for teaching and learning . [49]  IMDA and PDPC (20 20), A guide to job redesign in the age of AI , https://file.go.gov.sg/ai -guide to-jobredesign.pdf  (accessed on 15  November  2021).  [50]  Lane,  M. and A.  Saint -Martin (2021), “The impact of Artificial Intelligence on the labour market:  What do we know so far ?”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers ,  No. 256, https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/social -issues -migration -health/the -impact -of-artificial intelligence -on-the-labour -market_7c895724 -en (accessed on 24  September  2021).  [6]  Luckin,  R. (2017), “Towards artificial intelligence -based assessment systems”, Nature Human  Behaviour , Vol.  1/3, pp.  1-3, http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -016-0028 . [14]  McKinsey (2018), Adoption of AI advances, but foundational barriers remain ,  https://www.mckinsey.com/fea tured -insights/artificial -intelligence/ai -adoption -advances -butfoundational -barriers -remain  (accessed on 25  June  2021).  [54]  Molavi,  M., M.  Tavakoli and G.  Kismihók (2020), “Extracting Topics from Open Educational  Resources”, in Alario -Hoyos,  C. et  al. (eds.), Addressing Global Challenges and Quality  Education. EC -TEL 2020. Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Springer International  Publishing.  [13]  Nadkarni,  P., L.  Ohno -Machado and W.  Chapman (2011), “Natural language processing: an  introduction”, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , Vol.  18/5, pp.  544551, http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/AMIAJNL -2011 -000464 . [3]  Nedelkoska,  L. and G.  Quintini (2018), “Automation, skills use and training” , OECD Social,  Employment and Migration Working  Papers , No.  202, https://www.oecd ilibrary.org/employment/automation -skills -use-and-training_2e2f4eea -en (accessed on  4 June  2021).  [5] 
66  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  OCULUS (2021), Compare Headsets , https://www.oculus.com/compare/  (accessed on  12 November  2021).  [45]  OECD (2021), Adult Learning and COVID -19: How much informal and non -formal learning are  workers missing? , https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy -responses/adult -learning -andcovid -19-how-much -informal -and-non-formal -learning -are-workers -missing -56a96569/   (accessed on 2  July 2021).  [23]  OECD (2021), Dashboard on priorities for adult learning , https://www.oecd.org/els/emp/skills and-work/adult -learning/dashboard.htm  (accessed on 1  July 2021).  [15]  OECD (2021), Disability, Work and Inclusion in Ireland:  Engaging and Suppo rting Employers ,  OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/74b45baa -en. [34]  OECD (2021), OECD Digital Education Outlook 2021:  Pushing the Frontiers with Artificial  Intelligence, Blockchain and Robots , OECD Publishing, Paris,  https://dx.doi.org/1 0.1787/589b283f -en. [12]  OECD (2021), “State of implementation of the OECD AI principles: Insights from national AI  policies” , OECD DIgital Economy Papers , No.  311, https://www.oecd ilibrary.org/docserver/1cd40c44 en.pdf?expires=1636719281&id=id&accname=o cid84004878&checksum=2EFF5EBB117A88 3E493E515920967055  (accessed on 12  November  2021).  [47]  OECD (2021), “State of the implementation of the OECD AI principles: Insights from national AI  policies”, OECD Digital Economy Papers , Vol.  No. 311, http://www.oecd.ai.  (accessed on  25 October  2021).  [10]  OECD (2021), “Teachers and Leaders in Vocational Education and Training”, OECD Reviews of  Vocational Education and Training , https://www.oecd -ilibrary.org/docserver/59d4fbb1 en.pdf?expires=1635411529 &id=id&accname=ocid84004878&checksum=52A4C8745A7787 3027BDAA469BEBA758  (accessed on 28  October  2021).  [48]  OECD (2021), Training in Enterprises: New Evidence from 100 Case Studies ,  https://www.oecd.org/publications/training -in-enterprises -7d63d210 -en.htm  (accessed on  10 November  2021).  [26]  OECD (2020), Productivity gains from teleworking in the post COVID -19 era: How can public  policies make it happen? , https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy -responses/productivity gains -from-teleworking -in-the-post-covid -19-era-a5d52e99/  (accessed on 6  July 2021).  [24]  OECD (2020), The potential of online learning for adults: Early lessons from the COVID -19 crisis ,  https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy -responses/the -potential -of-online -learning -for-adults early -lessons -from-the-covid -19-crisis -ee040002/#boxsection -d1e233  (accessed on  1 July 2021).  [16]  OECD (2020), Diversity at work: Making the most out of increasing ly diverse societies ,  https://www.oecd.org/els/diversity -at-work -policy -brief-2020.pdf  (accessed on  23 September  2021).  [38]  OECD (2019), Artificial Intelligence in Society , OECD Publishing, Paris,  https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/eedfee77 -en. [2] 
DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13   67  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS OF USING ART IFICIAL INTELLIGENCE  FOR TRAINING   Unclassified  OECD (2019),  Getting Skills Right: Engaging Low -Skilled Adults in Learning ,  http://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/engaging -low-skilled -adults -2019.pdf  (accessed on  9 October  2019).  [30]  OECD (2019), Getting Skills Right: Future -Ready Adult Learning Systems , Getting Skills Right,  OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264311756 -en. [1]  OECD (2019), OECD Employment Outlook 2019:  The Future of Work , OECD Publishing, Paris,  https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9ee00155 -en. [59]  OECD (2017), Getting Skil ls Right: Skills for Jobs Indicators , Getting Skills Right, OECD  Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264277878 -en. [7]  OECD (2016), Getting Skills Right: Assessing and Anticipating Changing Skill Needs , Getting  Skills Right, OECD Publishing,  Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264252073 -en. [36]  OECD.AI (2021), Fostering a digital ecosystem for AI , https://oecd.ai/dashboards/ai principles/P11  (accessed on 27  August  2021).  [46]  OECD.AI (2021), Relative international AI skill demand , https: //oecd.ai/en/data -frompartners?selectedArea=ai -jobs-and-skills&selectedVisualization=relative -international -ai-skilldemand  (accessed on 25  October  2021).  [8]  OECD.AI (2021), Top AI skills worldwide , https://oecd.ai/data -frompartners?selectedTab=AIJobsAndSkills  (accessed on 18  August  2021).  [60]  OPSI (2021), “The Work”, AI Job Recommendation Service Using the National Job Information  Platform , https://oecd -opsi.org/innovations/the -work/  (accessed on 26 October  2021).  [11]  Pega (2017), What Consumers Really Think About AI: A Global Study . [53]  Phillips,  P. et al. (2020), Four Principles of Explainable Artificial Intelligence , NIST,  http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8312 -DRAFT . [51]  Pluralsight (n.d.), Accuracy and Pluralsight’s adaptive assessment engine ,  https://www.pluralsight.com/content/dam/pluralsight2/product/iris/AdaptiveAssessments_af_v 1.pdf  (accessed on 15  September  2021).  [25]  PWC (2020), The Effectiveness of Virtual Reali ty Soft Skills Training in the Enterprise Public  Report The Effectiveness of Virtual Reality Soft Skills Training in the Enterprise ,  https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/consulting/technology/emerging -technology/assets/pwc understanding -the-effectiveness -of-soft-skills -training -in-the-enterprise -a-study.pdf  (accessed  on 15  September  2021).  [56]  Rapp,  A. (2017), “Designing interactive systems through a game lens: An ethnographic  approach”, Computers in Human Behavior , Vol.  71, pp.  455-468,  http://dx.doi.org/1 0.1016/J.CHB.2015.02.048 . [29]  Sailer,  M. et  al. (2017), “How gamification motivates: An experimental study of the effects of  specific game design elements on psychological need satisfaction”, Computers in Human  Behavior , Vol.  69, pp.  371-380, http://dx.d oi.org/10.1016/J.CHB.2016.12.033 . [27]  SAS (2021), Big Data: What it is and why it matters , https://www.sas.com/en_us/insights/big data/what -is-big-data.html  (accessed on 8  September  2021).  [4] 
68  DELSA/ELSA/WD/SEM(20 21)13  OPPORTUNITIES AND DR AWBACKS  OF USING ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE FOR TR AINING   Unclassified  SkillLab (n.d.), Adding skills from “other” experiences , https://skilllabdesk.zendesk.com/hc/en us/articles/360015665158 -Adding -skills -from-other -experiences  (accessed on  29 September  2021).  [33]  Squicciarini,  M. and H.  Nachtigall (2021), “Demand for AI skills in jobs: Evidence from online job  postings” , OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers , No.  2021/03,  https://doi.org/10.1787/3ed32d94 -en (accessed on 23  September  2021).  [55]  van Roy,  R. and B.  Zaman (2018), “Need -supporting gamification in education: An assessment  of motivational effec ts over time”, Computers & Education , Vol.  127, pp.  283-297,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPEDU.2018.08.018 . [28]  Vanlehn,  K. (2011), “The Relative Effectiveness of Human Tutoring, Intelligent Tutoring Systems,  and Other Tutoring Systems”, Educational Psychologist , Vol.  46/4, pp.  197-221,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2011.611369 . [57]  Videnscenter for Velfærdsteknologi (2020), Elevevaluering af VR -forløb - Elevrespons ,  https://videnscenterportalen.dk/vfv/wp -content/uploads/sites/6/202 0/05/Elevsurvey powerpoint -VFV-f%C3%A6rdig.pdf  (accessed on 10  November  2021).  [58]  Windisch,  H. (2015), “Adults with low literacy and numeracy skills:  A literature review on policy  intervention” , OECD Education Working Papers , No.  123, OECD Publishing, P aris,  https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jrxnjdd3r5k -en. [31]                               
