     ACM U.S. Public Policy Council   ACM Europe Council Policy Committee    Page 1 of 2      acmpo@acm.org   www.acm.org/public -policy       June 1, 2017   Statement on Internet of Things Privacy and Security   by ACM U.S. Public Policy Council and ACM Europe Council Policy Committee   Internet of Things (IoT) systems have  rapidly assumed important roles in daily life by providing new  capabilities to streamline diverse tasks. IoT catalyzes new capabilities and creates opportunities for  increased productivity and societal benefits.     As the IoT ecosystem unfolds, this wide r ange of functions and components will result in significant  privacy and security challenges that should be addressed. Large -scale, pervasive networks that collect  data about the world around us and new predictive technologies and algorithms enable innovati ve IoT  uses. Yet, the data collected from IoT devices and algorithms that use this data for decision -making can  result in unintended consequences. The ubiquity of IoT also presents new security and privacy concerns,  making it important to incorporate priva cy and security controls into the life cycle of IoT devices.     Certain IoT components have minimal functionality, limited computational power and storage, and low  energy resources, which can sometimes make conventional security and privacy protections diff icult to  deploy. Such deployments may need to take advantage of new protocols and system designs that are  better equipped to operate in resource -limited environments.     Policy and technical approaches to emerging IoT privacy and security challenges should continue to  encourage innovation while ensuring that consumer confidence in these devices and systems is  bolstered by strong privacy and security practices. The principles outlined in this statement provide an  approach for addressing privacy and security c hallenges in the IoT ecosystem:     Support Privacy and Security Throughout the IoT Device Life Cycle      Address privacy and security risks throughout the IoT device life cycle:  Addressing IoT privacy  and security challenges from requirements specification to end-of-life, including across changes  in maintenance ownership, can help prevent systemic vulnerabilities and avoid difficult  retrofitting. Manufacturers and solution providers should conduct scheduled privacy and  security assessments and ensure the effica cy of privacy and security measures prior to  deployment and regularly over the course of a device’s life span.      Ensure continuous, reliable device operation:  The failure of IoT systems can cause irreparable  damage and have serious implications for physical  safety. The pervasiveness of IoT systems in  the everyday lives of consumers raises the stakes. IoT device manufacturers should aim to  deploy reliable and dependable systems.      Provide regular patches, upgrades, and software updates:  IoT components may shi p with  vulnerabilities, and new vulnerabilities may be discovered over time; manufacturers are  encouraged to provide mechanisms to maintain the privacy and security of IoT components  throughout their life cycle. It is similarly important to build consumer understanding and 
          Page 2 of 2       awareness on the importance of software upgrades and to encourage manufacturers to deploy  patching and software updates whenever possible.      Consider issues with abandoned, orphaned, and legacy components:  Manufacturers should  monitor concerns related to abandoned or legacy technology that can pose privacy and security  threats to existing or new components as new vulnerabilities arise.     Develop New Technologies to Support IoT Privacy and Security      Support flexible access control:  IoT c omponents, especially those without user interfaces,  should support secure and private interactions and updates. The IoT ecosystem needs flexible  approaches to access controls that foster privacy and security.      Leverage advances in cryptography and cybers ecurity:  Technically -limited IoT components  may benefit from advances in “lightweight” cryptography and new encryption implementations.  These options are less resource intensive and therefore more usable within the constraints  imposed by many IoT componen ts.     Protect Consumer Data      Address data ownership: The ubiquity of IoT components means an increase in the scale of data  captured, shared, collected, and analyzed. Stakeholders should plan for future challenges of  data ownership as they relate to privacy , security, and intellectual property.      Build consumer awareness about privacy and data sources: As IoT permeates consumers’ lives,  it will be important to educate consumers on the privacy and security issues that IoT presents  and on how to best protect t hemselves from attacks. Organizations should be transparent to  consumers about how data about them is collected, used, retained, and shared.      Protect data integrity: IoT components should receive, process, and create data that is accurate,  consistent, and relevant for the purposes for which it was collected or produced.     Foster Cooperation Among Stakeholders      Promote an interdisciplinary approach to trust: Hardware and software engineering,  cryptography, human factors, and social science can all contribute  to fostering a safe, secure,  and trustworthy IoT ecosystem.       Encourage coordinated efforts among stakeholders: Improved coordination between the public  and private sectors can foster IoT innovation and protect privacy and security. Cooperation  among governments and other stakeholders, including businesses, academia, professional  societies, consumer advocates, nonpr ofits, and other civil society organizations will help drive  and realize IoT innovation. Similarly, technical issues cross borders and require international  coordination and cooperation.  
