Designing an ethical,  socially accountable   facial recognition system A vision from Thales thalesgroup.com
2 Editorial The ability to identify someone’s face is a talent  we all rely on, both for our social interactions,  as well as for our own safety and protection.  This is an innate ability, but we don’t all possess  it at the same degree. According to research  made by the University of York, humans can  recognise 5,000 faces1. A super-recogniser  may be able to memorise and recall 10,000.  But when asked to match a face and a picture,  even the best-trained are accurate only 80%  of the time.   As we look for secure and convenient ways  to identify people, facial recognition is the  least intrusive and most accessible form  of biometric identification: contactless,  fast and reliable. When asked to match a face  and a picture, the top performing 100 Facial  Recognition algorithms tested by the United  States NIST agency in 2020 are accurate 95%  of the time. Facial recognition technologies are still making  headway, and identity applications are  constantly being improved. The industry’s R&D  teams are blending their expertise in identity  technology, biometrics and cybersecurity to  design better performing solutions. Continuous  improvements are being made regarding  accuracy, speed, privacy best practices,  security issues, standards and user experience.  This e-book explores the different aspects of this  fascinating emerging technology. 1 Humans can recognize 5,000 faces on average, according to a study from the University of York, 201 8.  https ://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rspb.20 18.1 319
3 All you need to know   about facial recognition What is facial recognition ? Facial recognition is a technology designed to automatically identify a person using their face  if they are previously known to the system. If the system does not have a reference image  available of the individual, the technology is not capable of identifying the individual. Its  first steps date back to the 1970s, but it has made considerable headway in recent years thanks  to increasing computer processing power, machine learning and the development of Artificial  Intelligence (AI). Facial recognition is a biometric technology which uses different scientific methods to identify and  verify individuals through analysis of their specific physical characteristics. Other common biometric  modalities include fingerprints, palm geometry, voice, Iris and DNA.  How does a computer  recognize a face ? Facial recognition solutions do not compare a person’s  face to an actual photo: they rely on extracting key  features, called “vectors,” from a photo, or specific  data points on the face, such as the spacing of the  eyes, the bridge of the nose, the base of the ears, the  space between chin and mouth to create a unique  template for each face which is then encrypted. This  encrypted template data obtained during enrolment  of the individual is then stored digitally in a reference  file or database. Once the person’s live face is then  presented after enrolment, the facial recognition  system will be able to match the live face with the  one previously provided by scoring the match as a  high probability of it being the same person. The initial facial images must be of a certain quality  and resolution to be enrolled. Facial images can  be obtained and enrolled one by one, or from  a gallery of faces. The templates stored in the  reference database cannot be used to recreate the  face as they are essentially a one-way mathematical  interpretation of the original facial image. Several steps are required for making a facial match: First, a reference digital facial template is created,  incorporating all the key facial characteristics  from a photo or image of the individual. This  is the biometric data acquisition phase or  enrolment phase.Subsequently, when attempting to verify or  identify an individual, a photo or a video  of them is captured or obtained .  The  facial recognition system then uses the same  mechanism on the new facial image to create a  new template to compare against the reference  template database. In cases where an individual  is submitting their own facial image remotely,  a selfie image can be submitted via a mobile  app. The capture of their photo or video should  include liveness detection, to prevent spoofing  by presenting just a photo at the time of remote  capture.  The facial recognition system then compares  the newly collected facial image to the  reference template. If a sufficiently high  comparison score is obtained between the  face presented to a reference template, the  individual is determined to be “recognized”.  In some situations more than one ‘match’ may  be obtained from comparing against a gallery  of templates. The facial recognition system  will present the matching candidates for an  authorized person to adjudicate the actual  match, if any. 
4 Authentication (also called verification) seeks to  prove someone’s identity – are you really who you  say you are? Authentication consists of performing  a one-to-one (or 1:1) comparison of the newly  presented image of an individual, against their own  reference template – the one they claim to be. This  requires prior enrolment and consent from the person  who is to be verified. The aim is to confirm that the  live face being presented is the same as the one  previously enrolled. Authentication is quite notably  used by many to unlock their smartphones on a daily  basis.  Identification is the process of finding out someone’s  identity – who are you? When seeking to identify an  individual, their captured image or video is compared  to a database of facial templates to see if there is  a match. This is referred to as a one-to-n (or 1:N)  matching, with N representing the total number of  templates in the database.  Distinct ways of using facial recognition  Facial recognition – whether authentication,  identification or a mix of both – may be used in a  variety of ways, and offer many advantages to the  organizations and companies deploying it, as well  as to the people benefitting from this non-invasive,  contactless technology.  • Physical access control: allows for an easier  and more secure access to restricted areas (e.g.  office buildings, sporting events, warehouses…).  • Airport boarding / passenger journey: when  used for check-in, baggage drop, border check,  gate access… facial recognition makes it easier  to cross borders and board planes. • ID verification: facial recognition provides a  more secure way to sign up for digital services,  with reduced risk of fraud or identity theft (e.g.  remote ID check when registering for online  services, onboarding customers remotely…)  • Law Enforcement (lead generation after an  incident). Similar to DNA and fingerprint  evidence, some law enforcement agencies are using facial recognition to generate leads after a  crime has been committed if there is video evidence  of the incidence. Unlike DNA and fingerprints,  facial recognition cannot be used to convict  anyone. It can only be used to provide leads that  allow law enforcement to narrow their search and  solve crimes faster. In many jurisdictions, new or  updated regulations may be required to ensure that  civil liberties are not violated. • Surveillance (locating, potentially identifying  someone and tracking their movements in real-time).  With the explosion of video cameras throughout the  world, the possibility exists for government entities  to identify and track people as they navigate  throughout the day. This application, rightly so, has  civil liberty and privacy concerns. This application  should only be done when appropriate regulations  are in place that balance an individual’s rights  against the common good. Facial recognition for  this purpose provides enormous benefits when  used by authorities to help find missing children and  those with limited cognitive capacities, abducted  individuals, etc. When facial recognition is used for either real-time  surveillance purposes or law enforcement lead  generation, a regulatory framework may be required  to be put in place to ensure respect for individual  privacy and civil liberties, however this may vary for  each situation, country or jurisdiction.Authentication vs. identification:   what’s the difference and how are they used? Two types of facial recognition can be done: authentication and identification. 
5   Facial recognition is useful in a wide area of contexts and applications, especially when  massive crowd movements are involved, with safety and control issues. Illustration? Paris Airports recently decided to move from fingerprint to facial recognition  technology. When fully implemented, it will allow for 45% of Paris Airports’ 100 million  yearly passengers to benefit from fast-track control – up from the current 10%. Passengers  with electronic passports present it at the eGate, to be automatically scanned. A first door  opens, the passenger shows their face at the camera. The image is compared to the data in  the passport’s chip. In a few seconds, the passenger has crossed the border, authorities are  warned if anything is wrong, and the whole airport user experience is improved.  Facial recognition can thus contribute to everybody’s safety and comfort. It allows for: Airport facial recognition technology can be usefully applied to other contexts: access to  sensitive locations, large events entry, ID control at large company buildings. Corporations  can make sure only authorized workers are allowed in some areas, check arrivals and  departure from work, and smoothen the security process for everyone. Data need not leave  the control device, but encryption can further enhance data security and privacy, to placate  legitimate concerns about civil liberties.Less waiting time, better security:  facial recognition at airports and company sites Border control checks takes just 10 to 15 seconds in  airports equipped with facial recognition! 1 • Simpler and faster site access control. Facial recognition is safer than the usual security  badges, which may be stolen or lost, and faster, less intrusive than other biometrics technology  such as fingerprint analysis or iris recognition; • More efficient boarding process in  transportation, through automatic  control and screening of unwanted  individuals posing a security risk by using  the traveller’s face as their ‘ticket’;• Reliable identity control, when  combined with the use of electronic  passports, which also store facial data:  identity theft is made virtually impossible; • An alternative solution to badge or  fingerprint control, with enhanced  efficiency: no badge needed, no  physical control by a security guard or  an automatic terminal, no badge lending  possible…;• Automatized access to services or  equipment, in the way smartphones are  unlocked by using facial recognition of its  user; • Real-time site monitoring to identify  and locate people in a crowd (wanted  individual, missing child, etc.);• Commercial applications (purchase,  payment, etc.)… 1 La Tribune
6 Nowadays, facial recognition has become a mature,  reliable, very accurate, fast matching technology. •  It is free from most of the physical interaction required  with other biometric technologies. Unlike fingerprints  recognition, it raises no health concerns, as it does not involve  any physical contact with a sensor. Unlike DNA analysis, it  is non-intrusive and requires no sampling. It is ergonomic,  user-friendly , with optimal user experience: unlike iris  recognition, it does not require the individual to take position  precisely in front of a sensor; unlike other technologies, such as  signature recognition, it does not imply any particular action  on the part of the person controlled.Performance and   comfort combined • It eliminates most risk of fraud or identity theft, unlike  systems based on security badges, for instance. • It is simple and easy to set up, both for the IT team  and for the site security staff. It can be integrated  and deployed easily in either green field locations or  existing video surveillance infrastructures.      Last, but not least, the technology is improving as it is more  widely used: thanks to machine learning, facial recognition  gains accuracy as the data grows. The top ten algorithms  tested by the United States NIST agency in 2020 showed 1  to 1 accuracy above 98%, where the top five are above 99%. 
7 Roadblocks on the way  !   Facial Recognition is already much more accurate than humans and it is much more  technically efficient and reliable. And it continues to get better: experts expect it to  improve by a factor of 2 within 4 years! While the technology is already deployed with  important benefits in a number of applications, we will see more of its adoption in the  future. Still, fears and concerns, some of which are very legitimate, may explain that  the development of facial recognition is not as fast as could be expected, considering  the technology’s manifest performance and strength. General public mistrust People are often hesitant about new technology – and even more so if they don’t  understand how it works. So while on the one hand, many persons have already  adopted the ease and efficiency of facial technology for unlocking their smartphone,  on the other hand, they are concerned about matters relating to their privacy. More  specifically, they fear a potential unauthorised collection and utilisation of their  biometric data.  Wider communication on how facial recognition works might allay some of these  fears. It should be pointed out that biometric technologies do not necessarily imply a  centralized database. For instance, a facial photo is stored locally on an electronic  passport, to allow for its bearer’s authentication using facial recognition. When  identifying electronically when crossing border control at the airport, the data doesn’t  leave the local system. But to a greater extent, these concerns highlight the need for well-defined legal  frameworks and for facial recognition solutions to be used in strict compliance with  these. Concerns of «statistical differences» Objection to facial recognition is rooted primarily in concerns surrounding violation of  civil liberties and privacy. However, the technology itself is not the risk – its inappropriate  use is. This makes the development of laws and rules that balance the protection of civil  liberties and privacy against the common good a priority. And, as previously stated in this paper, a framework of laws and regulations surrounding  the surveillance and law enforcement applications is under consideration in many  countries to protect individual rights.    Another top concern revolves around questions of ethics and equity, specifically: • Concerns of bias, where opponents say technology may not be as reliable  depending on a person’s gender or ethnicity • Concerns of misidentification (False Match) and their potential unqualified  consequences.
8 Lack of transparency Another concern is the technical possibility of deploying a facial recognition solution  without people being aware of it, whether in a public or a private place. It’s important  to note that video surveillance is already common place in both public and private  environments today. Adding real-time facial recognition to these applications is where  transparency becomes an issue.   In matters of surveillance, Thales supports the legislator’s role in protecting  individual freedoms by setting the laws and regulations applying to security solutions,  and providing public information about where and when these same solutions are  effectively deployed.Many of these claims are based on the performance and results of older tests that  used limited and unrepresentative datasets. However, the latest developments in facial  recognition technologies have significantly lowered the scope of these “statistical  differences”. As datasets get bigger and bigger, the technology learns and gets more  precise. Face templates are also getting more efficient: the features and angles chosen  are more neutral. According to the December 2019 NIST Face Recognition Vendor Test:  Part 3: Demographics Effect, the performance of the algorithms are a direct correlation  to the data included in the database. To know more about about this study, please consult the following  publication from the National Institute of Standards and Technology : Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) Part 3: Demographic EffectsTo minimize statistical differences, databases require a diverse and representative  dataset. A study led by the National Institute of Standards and Technology  shows that performance results are very consistent when a candidate’s face  is compared to a set of data from the same country, sex, ethnicity and age. It  compares facial recognition performance whether the person is from Russia,  Somalia or Vietnam, and shows that if a Russian woman of older age is matched  through an algorithm that is seeded predominately by a country other than  Russia, the results decrease significantly. The key to consistent performance  across ethnicity, age, and sex is to ensure that the system used is seeded with a  robust, diverse database.
9 In Europe, a common  framework for 500 million citizens  Since 201 8, in the whole European Union, The GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) sets the guidelines for country legislations on the protection of personal data – which include biometric data. It applies to 500 million European citizens in 28 countries (Great Britain has retained it despite «Brexit»). It implies: • «F ree, specific, informed and unambiguous» consent from the userwhen processing their personal data  ; •T he «right to be forgotten», meaning any individual has a right to request anorganization to delete their personal data, • S everal security obligations , among which systematic information of concernedusers if a security breach is discovered inthe database. However, digital technology watchdogs in several countries are suggesting the possibility of specific regulations for facial recognition solutions that may go beyond the legal framework for collecting personal information. In France, the CNIL (National Commission on Informatics and Liberty) thus comments, «facial recognition calls for political choices: on the role of technology, on its impact on the fundamental freedoms of individuals, on humanity in the digital age.”  In the United States, a patchwork of laws and differences between states  In the United States, different states or localities have passed specific legislation to regulate or prohibit the use of biometrics in general, or the sole use of facial recognition technologies, by government agencies and / or private companies. • Sever al local jurisdictions and States have legislation on the use of biometric data. •In all oth er States, you can lawfully use software that identifies a person usingimages captured without their consent inpublic space. • Sever al cities in the USA have banned the use of facial recognition technology bylaw enforcement agencies, whether publicor private. Many of the involved players (suppliers and users of facial recognition systems, local or federal organizations, etc.) are now calling on the Federal government to define a clear policy line, allowing States and local jurisdictions to rely on a definite and common framework to design their own legislation.What legal framework for facial recognition   ? In Europe, Asia and the United States, facial recognition technology is developing under very different legal frameworks. And these are still changing. 
10 Using facial recognition in a  socially responsible way Facial recognition is part of our future. Still, some  fear abuses in the use of facial recognition: we  are aware of this. Thales’s solutions are designed  with strict ethical principles in mind.  We not  only master biometrics: we are cybersecurity  experts as well. Coupled with our TrUE AI  approach (2) , our range of expertise allows us  to build end-to-end solutions that are safe,  ensuring data confidentiality and integrity,  as well as secure storage of biometric data.  Wider use of facial recognition seems  inevitable because it is reliable, efficient, easy  to deploy and does not require specific sensors.  Most of all, it can be of great help to humans in  many ways. Let’s ensure that it happens under the  best possible conditions, especially in sensitive  sectors such as safety, health and commerce.  New applications may emerge that are yet to  imagine: a few years ago, who would have  thought facial recognition technology  would be applied to agriculture, to improve  identification of cows or pigs? (2) The Thales TrUE AI approach stands for Transparent,  Understandable and Ethical artificial intelligence.  Transparent AI, where users can see the data used to arrive  at a conclusion. Understandable AI, that can explain and  justify the results and finally an Ethical AI, that follows  objective standards protocols, laws, and human rights. https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/journalist/thales-podcastsWe design all our   solutions in accordance   to strict ethical rules For us, at Thales, facial recognition solutions must  be designed in accordance to a few essential rules. • Confidentiality and consent. Setting up  a facial recognition solution involves the  collection of biometric data from people. This  process must be carried out with the explicit  consent of all concerned. Confidentiality of  data must be guaranteed and protected from  any use not initially intended and agreed upon. • Transparency. Any facial recognition solution  must be deployed in total transparency. Data  subjects must have access to a description of  how biometric data is collected, stored and  used and for how long their information will  be retained. • Precision and reliability. Facial recognition  solutions must ensure maximum precision and  reliability. They must be based on algorithms  processing a very diverse set of data and  sensitive to all the specifics of the captured  image (glasses, hat , scarf...). • Security. Facial recognition systems should  by design ensure total security of the personal  and biometric data collected and stored. Data  should be encrypted both at rest and in motion.  • Ethics & Compliance. Facial recognition  solutions must be designed and implemented  in full compliance with market standards,  regulatory and legal obligations. They must  respect standardized and objective protocols,  legislation and human rights. • Accountability. Technology providers must  support customers over the long term, offering  sustainable technical solutions, adapted to  their present and future needs.
Thales is a mem ber of several  biometric indu stry associatio ns  and groups, among which are  the Biometrics Institute an d the  International Biom etric  and  Identity Association.  Biometrics Institute International Biometric and Identity  Association To know more about Facial Recognition at Thales please get in touch with Kadie-Ann Fyffe  Communications Specialist, Identity & Biometric Solutions E-mail:  kadie-ann.fyffe@thalesgroup.com thalesgroup.com
