1 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age
The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeBridges to the future of education : policy recommendations for the digital age :     puentes al futuro de la educación : recomendaciones de política para la era     digital / Alejandra Cardini [comp] - 1a ed. - Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos     Aires : Santillana, 2018.   256 p. ; 23 x 14 cm. - (Fundación Santillana)    ISBN 978-950-46-5681-4    1. Política Educacional. 2. Cultura Digital. I. Cardini, Alejandra    CDD 379 ISBN: 978-950-46-5681-4   © 2018, Fundación Santillana Av. Leandro N. Alem 720 (C1001AAP) Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires República Argentina Queda hecho el depósito que marca la ley 11.723 Impreso en Argentina. Printed in Argentina Primera edición: agosto de 2018.  FP impresora S.A., Beruti 1560, Buenos Aires. Se imprime en agosto de 2018BRIDGES TO THE FUTURE OF  EDUCATION: POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE DIGITAL AGE
The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeThe Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age Content Opening remarks. José María Lladós, Julia Pomares ................. 7 Acknowledgements ..................................................................................... 9 About the T20 ................................................................................................ 11 Prologue. Claudia Costin, Getulio Vargas ........................................ 13 Introduction. Alejandra Cardini ............................................................. 17 Policy briefs .................................................................................................... 25 It takes more than a village. Effective Early Childhood  Development, Education and Care services require competent systems. Mathias Urban, Alejandra Cardini,  Rita Flórez Romero .............................................................................. 25 Redesigning education landscapes for the future of work: third-space literacies and alternative learning models. Cristóbal Cobo, Alessia Zucchetti, Axel Rivas ................................................................................................. 43 Bridging the Education-Workforce Divide: Strategies to Meet Ever Changing Needs andMitigate Future Inequalities. Claudia Costin,  Allan Michel Jales Coutinho ............................................................ 59  Financing Quality and Equitable Education in LATAM. Javier González, Santiago Cueto, Alejandra Cardini, Bárbara Flores ................................................. 73 Transforming education financing for inclusive, equitable and quality learning outcomes for the 2030/SDG4 Agenda. Kazuhiro Yoshida, Yasushi Hirosato, Shinichiro Tanaka .............................................................. 87 Issues and options for financing post-compulsory education. Mick Fletcher, Paul Grainger ................................. 105 About the authors ..................................................................................... 119
7 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeOpening remarks This book represents one of the many efforts and contributions  the T20 has produced during this year. We are very honored  of having assumed this leadership responsibility between  CIPPEC and CARI.  We have gathered colleagues from think tanks, political  leaders, representatives of international organizations,  business leaders and members of other G20 engagement  groups fostering a collaborative enterprise to provide policy  solutions for countries’ leaders. This has been mainly done  through policy briefs, international summits and workshops  with a strong emphasis on collaborative work.   During the last few months we have witnessed new  risks for the stability of institutional arrangements, while  technological transitions keep giving way to several social,  economic and political transformations around the world.  This complicated scenario leaves many behind, who lack the  means and opportunities to adapt to a changing economy  and technological revolution. In this context, countries are  growing more socially fragmented, bringing about deep  skepticism regarding expert knowledge. The T20 Argentina has opened a new opportunity to show  the world the contribution and power of think tanks and  multilateral organizations. It has enabled us to have a proactive  attitude for the future, to collaborate with colleagues from  different disciplines and countries and show the importance  of cooperation in order to adopt changes for the welfare of  humankind. Our work has been organized around ten Task Forces  seeking to debate topics of a global importance, aiming to  support the G20 process by discussing and producing policy  recommendations. We intend to offer technical knowledge  at the service of the world’s population and the growth of  countries by providing innovative content and new paradigms. 
9 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age 8As T20 members, we have challenged ourselves to think,  to produce evidence, and to look for new solutions in order  to achieve an economically prosperous, environmentally  sustainable and socially inclusive future. Education has joined  the G20 and T20 agenda for the first time in their history.   Among its many policy briefs, “The Future of Work and  Education for the Digital Age” Task Force has produced  recommendations that articulate different dimensions of  education policy and technology-driven transformations.  We hope this first set of educational policy briefs inspire  subsequent T20 editions to consider education policy as a  key dimension that must be considered if we are to foster this  prosperous future. José María Lladós Executive Director of CARI Julia Pomares  Executive Director of CIPPECAcknowledgements This publication is the outcome of a collective effort. During 2018 many people and organizations have been actively  involved in the T20 process. This book reflects their hard  work and commitment.  In the first place, we would like to thank the co-chairs of  the T20 task force “The Future of Work and Education in  the Digital Age”: Martín Rapetti, Economic Development  Program Director at CIPPEC; Dennis Görlich, Head of Global  Challenges Center at Kiel Institute for the World Economy;  Fen Osler Hampson, Distinguished Fellow and Director of  the Global Security & Politics Program at CIGI; Jeffrey Sachs,  University Professor and Director at the Center for Sustainable  Development of The Earth Institute of Columbia University;  and Samir Saran, President of the Observer Researcher  Foundation.  Within this task force, the production was organized in six  interrelated themes: i) new social contracts for the digital age;  ii) global norms for new work relations in online platforms;  iii) measuring the digital economy and its impact on labour;  iv) technology and economic development; v) teaching and learning 21st century skills and; vi) education financing.  This work resulted in 14 policy briefs 1 that condense policy  recommendations for the G20. We could only publish a small selection of this fruitful production. This book compiles only  those policy briefs that address education.   We highly appreciate the encouragement of Julia Pomares  (Executive Director, CIPPEC) and José María Lladós  (Executive Director, CARI).  Policy briefs revision and editing  would have been impossible without the coordination of  the T20 Policy and Research Team led by Martín Rapetti,  Pablo Ava and Leandro Serino. The practical and restless  work from Iván Matovich, T20 education coordinator, and  1 This work can be found at: https:/ /t20argentina.org/policy-briefs/
11 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbout the T20  The T20 is one of the G20’s engagement groups, where  representatives of different civil society stakeholders take  their demands and proposals to G20 countries. It gathers  think tanks and leading experts from around the world to  produce concrete policy recommendations. During 2018 the  T20 is co-chaired by the Argentine Council for International  Relations (CARI) and the Center for the Implementation  of Public Policies for Equity and Growth (CIPPEC). More  information here: https:/ /t20argentina.orgLucas Delgado, coordinator of EduLAB CIPPEC, has been fundamental to make this project possible. Mercedes Mendez  Rivas, Sebastián Zírpolo, Martina Farías Bouvier, Ana María  Jiménez and Mercedes Spinosa were very generous with  their time and ideas. We also appreciate the support provided  by Ben Petrazzini (IDRC), Claudia Costin (Getulio Vargas  Foundation), Mary Godward (British Council, Argentina)  and Paul Grainger (Institute of Education, University College  London).  We are also very grateful to those institutions that supported  authors who have actively participated in the policy briefs  here presented: Ceibal Foundation (Uruguay), CIPPEC  (Argentina), Colombia National University (Colombia), Dublin  City University (Ireland), Getulio Vargas Foundation (Brazil), GRADE (Peru), Hiroshima University (Japan), the Institute of  Education of University College London (United Kingdom),  Japan International Cooperation Agency (Japan), RTU Ltd  (United Kingdom), Sophia University of Tokyo (Japan) and  SUMMA (Chile). Many other think tanks and research centers  have participated of this Task Force and we highly appreciate  their enthusiasm and contributions.  Finally, special thanks to Fundación Santillana. This book  could not have been published so quickly without the interest  that Miguel Barrero Maján showed in this process, José Liñán  and the constant orientation and assistance of Nilda Palacios.   Alejandra Cardini  Director Education Program CIPPEC Task Force co-chair of  “The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age” 10
13 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgePrologue For a long time in human history, education was considered  a luxury good, been monopolized by a few elites who had  the privilege to access and expand the knowledge frontier  according to their own discretion. Notwithstanding, since  the establishment of democratic systems and, most recently,  the Declaration of Human Rights, this view has changed  dramatically. Today, education is mostly perceived as a  public good, rising before the eyes of the disfranchised as  a path for liberation and change. The promise of education  has become synonymous of better opportunities including  higher incomes, better health, increased social cohesion and  overall wellbeing. Yet, the shift in global discourse and practice has not  materialized these outcomes everywhere. Through national  and international evaluations and other accountability  systems, we know that many countries and economies are  not ensuring quality education for all, as established in the  “Incheon 2030 Declaration”, included in the Sustainable  Development Goals approved at the General Assembly of the  United Nations in 2015. In some cases, Education has indeed  become a path for change, allowing citizens of all backgrounds to access schools, learn and build skills throughout the life  span. On the other hand, some other millions of children and  youth still walk the path without the necessary tools to realize  their potential amid economic, political and social strife. The risks related to this unfortunate situation are not only  associated with the unfulfilled right to quality education, but  also with the emergence of the fourth Industrial Revolution or  what became known as the future of work. With the growing  automation and robotization initially in the developed world,  but increasingly even in less affluent economies, human labor  has been substituted by machines or algorithms. New jobs will certainly be created, but not for the same  people. This demands that governments and communities 
15 14 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageact with a sense of urgency, since the competences required  to prosper in this new environment will certainly be different  than those prevalent today. Regardless of setbacks, the global community continues to  commit to the ideal expressed in the Declaration through  documents such as the Millennium Development Goals and  Sustainable Development Goals, which are new expressions  of this shared vision. It is in this context that Think Tanks are  coming together and trying to address the huge challenge  of helping countries to fulfill the 2030 Education agenda  on access, completion and quality while ensuring that 21st  century skills are delivered to all in each and every school.  Policymakers, educators and civil society organizations  in different countries are trying to ensure that those  commitments are met. However, it is necessary to join forces  with them, especially in the developing world, as they struggle  with the multifaceted and complex task of addressing the  right to education of children, adolescents and adults.  Challenges faced by governments in the field of education  are indeed complex and demand a myriad of well-crafted  policies and programs to ensure that all citizens can access,  learn and build skills throughout their lives. Most importantly,  it calls upon global expertise and collaboration. Think Tanks  and research groups can fill the knowledge gaps by bringing  their own evidence and expertise on existing best practices  and positive divergences to inform the debate and achieve  the shared vision.  The knowledge produced by global networks might become  a powerful way to build this dream because of their ability to synthesize and generalize knowledge from different contexts  and experiences and to contribute with novel frameworks and  insights for collective action. If we aim to bring about change  to scale and ensure that people walk the path of liberation  everywhere, these efforts must continue and be improved  upon. And this book, published by T20 in collaboration with Fundación Santillana, is a synthesis and a report of such  efforts. To achieve the shared vision and truly realize the promise  of education, we must work together to think in novel ways  and tackle the educational “challenges of the past” - which  still hunt the lives of several thousands of children and youth  worldwide -, while mitigating the unforeseeable challenges  of the future.  Claudia Costin Director of the Center for Excellence  and Innovation in Education Policies Getulio Vargas Foundation
17 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeIntroduction Argentina’s G20 presidency has changed the role of education  policy within this leading forum. This is the first time that  Education is included as a working group in the G20 history.  This decision has had direct effects in the T20, the G20  engagement group that develops policy recommendations  through different thematic Task Forces.  Education systems and policies usually focus on local  perspectives. This is an exceptional opportunity to open  a global discussion about the future of education among  experts and policy-makers. Task Force 1, “The Future of  Work and Education for the Digital Age”, has undertaken  this challenge. We aimed to produce education policy  recommendations based on a vision that stands for education  as a key dimension of policy agendas for global development.  Since the first working session at the “Inception Workshop:  Vision and Strategies for 2018”, Task Force members have  agreed on considering education of crucial importance, as  it equalizes opportunities, strengthens democracies and  contributes to economic growth.  This vision is aligned with United Nations’ Sustainable  Development Goals. More specifically, SDG number 4 seeks  to “ensure inclusive and quality education for all and promote  lifelong learning” (United Nations, 2017). Universal access to  quality education is meant to play a key role in creating a more  inclusive, just and equitable world. Achieving these goals is  only possible through long-term advocacy. Its consideration  within the T20 agenda is an important step forward, as it  allows discussing the future of education systems and policies  from a global and collaborative perspective.    Under these premises, this Task Force has addressed two  very different challenges. On one hand, education policy  recommendations seek to deal with a XIX century challenges  still present in many regions and countries across the  world: access and learning. As UN indicators show, primary 
19 18 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageeducation in developing countries has reached a 91% enrolment  rate, but 57 million children remain out of school. Most of them,  live in Sub-Saharian Africa, Southern Asia and conflict-affected  areas. Enrolment rates in secondary education are even  worse: 84% for lower secondary education and 63% for upper  secondary education (United Nations, 2017). At the same time,  recommendations have also aimed at the so called “learning  crisis”: many children attend school, but they do not go through  deep learning experiences. According to UNESCO’s Education  for All Global Monitoring Report, 130 million children attend  primary school, but they are unable to read, write and do basic  mathematics (2014).  On the other hand, this Task Force provided policy  recommendations that aimed at analysing XXI century  opportunities emerging from the new relation between  technological change, employment and education. The digital  age has opened perspectives towards traditional education;  these have raised new questions about curriculum, teacher  development, certifications, among many other dimensions  of education policy. Furthermore, Task Force members have  identified opportunities to articulate new digital technologies with alternative learning ways that might enhance pedagogical  practices and improve outcomes. Such ideas have also  considered States’ role and equity matters.  These two challenges need to bridge old and unsolved  educational problems with new opportunities. We must not  address them as a two-phase process, but as a complex scenario  where new technologies might contribute to imagine the future  of education. In other words, digitalization and technologydriven changes might provide education systems with tools to  foster inclusion, quality and gender and socioeconomic equity.  With these challenges in mind, this task force has approached  education by producing policy briefs in four different areas.  Although they are here theoretically separated, many links can  be traced among them. Firstly, this task force has identified the importance of addressing  skills development since the very beginning of life. Evidence  shows that early childhood development has substantial effects  in subsequent education levels. In this regard, we recommend  governments to support measures that make systemic  approaches sustainable; to initiate and support joint learning  looking at Early Childhood Development, Education and Care  (ECD/ECEC) initiatives across G20 countries; and to embrace  and support systemic approaches to ECD/ECEC governance,  policy implementation, and evaluation. In “It takes more than  a village. Effective Early Childhood Development, Education  and Care services require competent systems”, Mathias Urban,  Alejandra Cardini and Rita Flórez Romero explain that it is  necessary to support multi-dimensional networks of all actors  involved in developing and providing ECD/ECEC services at all  levels of government: local, regional and national. This requires  cross-national exchange and networking between policy  makers, practitioners, ECD/ECEC advocates, and researchers in  order to make successful and forward-looking approaches to  holistic ECD/ECEC services in the global south. Secondly, this Task Force has considered the emerging oppor tunities and threats that technology-driven transformations  have introduced in the education field. Recommendations are  focused on the value of knowledge and skills as well as digital-tools development for better articulation between different  dimensions of education policy.    On one hand, Cristobal Cobo, Alessia Zucchetti and Axel  Rivas reflect on non-formal learning, third-space literacies and  alternative mechanisms for certification. In regard of these  educational paths, they try to answer one of the most interesting  questions in this book: “Are these alternative forms of learning a  threat in terms of equity and established educational traditions  or an opportunity for expanding the right to education?”.  According to these authors, such educational paths must be  considered by education policy as they emerge throughout  the world aiming to prepare youth for entering the job market.  They recommend to facilitate, support and promote the 
21 20 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agediversification of learning, upskilling and reskilling opportunities  along with flexible certification mechanisms. Furthermore, they  sustain that G20 should encourage international organizations  and national governments to provide more flexible ways of  recognizing prior qualifications regardless of where they were  developed. On the other hand, Claudia Costin and Allan Jales Coutinho  also reflect about education, technology, in a context of rapidly  changing economies and new labour market developments.  Their work asks for those ways in which future inequalities  within and among countries could be diminished by closing  the Education-Workforce Divide. Authors explain that highorder cognitive skills, such as creativity and critical thinking,  will face a burgeoning demand as a result of digitalization and  technological innovations. Under these conditions, they suggest  that education systems must integrate unforeseeable social and  work demands into schools’ practices to ensure that students,  especially those from impoverished backgrounds, develop the  skills to participate in their local economies and democracies.  Thus, they propose to develop “supporting functions” - based  on digital technology- at the highest levels of government in order to enable G20 countries meeting timely and equitably  needs and aspirations of children and youth while facing market  changes. In this context, they suggest that equal emphasis must  be allocated to competency-based curriculum reforms, teacher  professional development and evaluation mechanisms.  Thirdly, this task force has developed recommendations on  education financing. This topic stands as a clear priority within  the G20. Policy recommendations on this issue address not only  the question about the amount (“how much?”) of financing, but  also complex allocation mechanisms and equity challenges.  Regarding this topic, Javier González, Santiago Cueto Caballero,  Alejandra Cardini and Bárbara Flores analyze the relation  between resources allocation and learning levels in Latin  America and the Caribbean (LATAM). They describe how these  are still insufficient and unequally distributed. Authors suggest that G20 leaders should encourage governments to invest more per student due to the high social rates of return of education;  this investment should prioritise the early years. They sustain  that such investment should be implemented by differentiated  subsidies according to the socioeconomic status of students,  in order to ensure equitable quality education and to improve  the inputs distribution across schools. According to this work,  policy-makers should parallelly encourage mechanisms to  recognise and implement pedagogical practices which have  proved to be effective to improve students learning.  Furthermore, Yoshida, Hirosato and Tanaka follow a similar  argument by relating education financing, inclusion, equity  and learning outcomes; they focus such analysis on UNESCO’s  Sustainable Development Goal 4, “Quality Education”. This work  suggests that G20 leaders should advocate and collaborate to  ensure that education policy frameworks, accompanied with  a broad-ranged major reform agenda, become realistic and  feasible plans of action. According to authors, this becomes  particularly important for policy-makers’ viewpoints, when  considering overall volume of work, timeframe, sequencing, and  budgetary implications. Moreover, in terms of education policy assessment, they propose G20 countries to work internationally  in order to move beyond the identification of enabling factors  even if they may provide useful hints for targeting investment  (“what” to invest in); these should be combined with knowledge  on practical process and methods of learning improvement  (“how” to achieve results).  Although compulsory education funding appears as a clear  priority among G20 countries, post-compulsory education  could also take advantage of technological change to improve  its financing mechanisms. In the last policy brief, Fletcher and  Grainger show a growing body of evidence on the efficacy  of specific funding mechanisms in particular circumstances.  As they sustain, it is not easy for policymakers to learn from  the experience of other countries. However, there is a risk that  mistakes will be expensively and wastefully repeated. Thus,  Fletcher and Grainger propose to develop a trans-national 
23 22 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageresource that would enable those responsible for this sector to  rapidly collect and collate information from different countries  and to develop a systematic analysis against agreed criteria.  This will allow policymakers to evaluate the appropriateness of  any specific financing mechanism.  Before moving forward to policy briefs, we would like to  mention that this task force identifies intersectional vacancies  between gender and education that need to be addressed in  next T20 editions. It is necessary to produce recommendations  to deal with parity in enrolment in all educational levels as  well as with subtle forms of gender inequality, such as women  under-representation in education leadership positions or  misrepresentation of gender in textbooks, among other very  important issues. Some of these aspects have been addressed  by W20 Engagement Group in its policy brief “Education &  Employment” (2018). Among some of its recommendations,  authors claim that G20 countries must guarantee that every  girl and boy in compulsory school age has access to a highquality education and comprehensive sexual education (CSE).  In addition, G20 countries should encourage young and adult  women to pursue and continue tertiary studies in areas of advanced technology and in those key subjects that are driving  the digital transformation, disrupting society, and creating a risk  for increased social exclusion. Last but not least, it is important to remark that this book is  the result of joined efforts amongst diverse think tanks and  research centers. It is the first step of an incipient network of  organizations that has worked together in the T20 process but  will keep on collaborating in the future. This is the first time that  Education is included as a working group in the G20 history. It  is our responsibility to work together so it is not the last one.  Alejandra Cardini  Director of the Education Program, CIPPEC Task Force co-chair of “The Future of Work  and Education for the Digital Age”References and Sources Education For All Global Monitoring Report (2014). Teaching and learning: achieving quality for all”. Paris: UNESCO.   United Nations (2017) “Progress towards the Sustainable  Development Goals. Report of the Secretary-General”. United  Nations: Economic and Social Council.  Unesco Institute for Statistics (2018) “Gross enrolment ratio  by level of education”. Unesco.  Women 20 Argentina (2018). Policy brief W20 Argentina:  Education & Employment.  World Bank (2018) World Development Report 2018: Learning  to Realize Education’s Promise. Washington, DC: World Bank.  doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1096-1. License: Creative Commons  Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age  It takes more than a village. Effective Early Childhood Development, Education and Care services require  competent systems  Mathias Urban (Dublin City University) Alejandra Cardini (CIPPEC)Rita Flórez Romero (National University of Colombia)
27 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age Abstract There is a global consensus about the importance of high  quality early childhood development, education and  care (ECDEC) programmes. Increasingly, the systemic  characteristics of early childhood programmes are recognised  by policy makers and international bodies. This ‘systemic turn’  has created new challenges. Education, primary healthcare,  nutrition, children’s rights, social cohesion, equality and  other aspects that contribute to the ECDEC system are  often grounded in different, and not necessarily matching,  conceptualisations, understandings, terminologies and  accepted practices. Bringing them together in a Competent  System  (Urban et al, 2012) requires coordinated approaches  to governance, resourcing, professional preparation, and evaluation that embrace complexity. Challenge Early childhood development, education and care (ECDEC) has rightly gained a prominent place on national and  international policy agendas. In recent years a broad global  consensus has emerged that ensuring access to high quality  early childhood development, education and care programmes  is one of the most effective policy tools countries can employ  to impact both individual and collective (i.e. national) wellbeing and educational achievement. Children learn and make  significant experiences from birth, long before they enter  formal schooling. The importance of the earliest years of human life as a  ‘critical period’ (Woodhead, 1996) is recognised not least  through the inclusion of early childhood in the frameworks  of lifelong learning, encompassing all stages of education, in  Goal 4 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). One  of the targets of Strategic Development Goal 4 (Education)  is to ensure, by 2030, ‘that all girls and boys have access to  quality early childhood development, care and pre-primary 
29 28 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeCountries in both the global north and south are increasingly  adopting policy frameworks that address early childhood  from a holistic perspective (Cardini & Guevara, in press).  Examples include the European Union Quality Framework for  Early Childhood Education and Care (Working Group on Early  Childhood Education and Care, 2014) and the Comprehensive  Care Strategy De Cero a Siempre in Colombia (Republic of  Colombia, 2013). These documents (and similar approaches in a growing number of countries) urgently require new and  effective approaches to governance, resourcing, professional  preparation and evaluation at all levels of the early childhood  system. They also point to the need – and possibility – for  shared learning from, with, and between policy and practice  initiatives in the global south and north. This need for a ‘systemic turn’ has created new challenges.  Education, primary healthcare, nutrition, children’s rights,  social cohesion, equality and other aspects that contribute to  the ECD/ECEC system are often grounded in different, and not  necessarily matching, conceptualisations, understandings,  terminologies and accepted practices. The need to coordinate  not only within one professional system (early education) but across several professional and disciplinary systems in ECD  adds to the complexity of the task. Bringing them together  in a Competent System (Urban, Vandenbroeck, Van Laere,  Lazzari, & Peeters, 2012) that ensure practices, knowledge and orienting values are shared between actors with a wide range  of professional and disciplinary backgrounds, and across  all levels of the system requires coordinated approaches  to governance, resourcing, professional preparation, and  evaluation that embrace complexity. This policy brief identifies  such possibilities and suggests a course of action that should  be taken by governments of G20 countries in order to build  effective, holistic, and sustainable support systems for young  children and their families.education so that they are ready for primary education’ (https:/ /www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainabledevelopment-goals)  1. While there is a strong focus on formal  education in SDG 4, it comes with a clear understanding that  educational achievement and lifelong learning are embedded  in, and dependent on, contextual factors that impact a child’s  holistic development from the very beginning of their life. However, early childhood development, education and care  programmes do not exist in a vacuum. The fact that they are  embedded in complex social, cultural and political systems  and, despite being of global concern, the upbringing of  young children is an inevitably local practice. This raises  fundamental questions that can only be addressed through  democratic debate of all stakeholders within countries, and  at all levels of government. As John Bennett, writing for the  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development  (OECD) puts it, early childhood policy is ‘deeply influenced  by underlying assumptions about childhood and education:  what does childhood mean in this society? How should young  children be reared and educated? What are the purposes of  education and care, of early childhood institutions? What are  the functions of early childhood staff? (OECD, 2001, p. 63) Moreover, caring for, and educating young children comprises  physical, emotional, cognitive, social, cultural and spiritual  aspects from birth (Cardini et al., 2017). It has to be welcomed that the systemic characteristics of  early childhood programmes are increasingly recognised by  policy makers and international bodies. 1 As the 2017 SDG report states, ‘Pre-primary education is, in fact, considered an important part of a holistic and robust educational system’  (United Nations, 2017, p. 24). Participation in ‘pre-primary or primary  education in the year prior to the official entrance age to primary  school’ (ibid) has increased to around 9 out of 10 children in Europe, Latin America, the Caribbean and North America; the rate in the least developed countries remains much lower (4 out of 10).
31 30 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age‘both horizontal and vertical coordination’ (Powers & Paulsell,  2018).2 The increasing recognition that early childhood development programmes require systemic, cross-sectoral approaches  (i.e. Competent Systems) in order to be effective has to  be welcomed. However, such recognition will have to be matched with proactive measures at the levels of policy,  practice, professional preparation and research. Research into early childhood systems commissioned by the  European Union has shown that Competent Systems (Urban,  Vandenbroeck, Van Laere, Lazzari, & Peeters, 2011; Urban et  al., 2012) require matching relationships, communication and  coordination between all levels of an early childhood system: • Individual (educators, teachers, childcare workers etc.) • Institutional (e.g. preschool settings) • Inter-institutional (e.g. preschool settings and professional preparation, various child and family services in the  community, practice and research) • Governance (e.g. strategic planning, policy formulation, regulation, resourcing, implementation and evaluation) Relationships in and between the levels of a Competent System unfold in three interconnected dimensions: • Knowledge(s) 2 The existence of these policy frameworks marks important progress  towards integrated systems. However, for them to affect sustainable  change governments will have to address two main challenges: 1. Ensure a ‘strong and equal relationship’ (Bennett) between ECDEC and  the compulsory school system. 2. Adopt participatory implementation strategies that avoid inappropriate ‘top-down’ processes. These are still prevalent in national policy documents, for instance in expressions like  ‘bajar la política a los territorios’ (De Cero a Siempre).Proposal Supporting the systemic turn in early childhood  development, education and care The acknowledgement that access to high quality early  childhood development and care services from birth is an  important precondition for educational achievement (and  therefore a critical factor for achieving SDG 4) is supported  by a strong body of research evidence and, increasingly, by  policy makers and international ECD/ECE advocates (World  Bank, 2011). Increasingly, countries in both the global south and north  are beginning to adopt systemic approaches to developing  early childhood development, education and care services.  Examples include programmes that are designed to provide  health, nutrition, early education as well as a range of  other supports for young children from birth, their families  and communities. Programmes are framed, at policy level,  by intersectoral and interdepartmental approaches to  governance, implementation and evaluation. For instance,  the European Union has adopted Council Conclusions  that emphasise the need for systemic approaches to  professionalising the early childhood workforce in its 28  member states (Council of the European Union, 2011).  In Latin America, some countries are developing new, intersectoral and holistic public policy approaches to early  childhood development, education and care systems, e.g.  Uruguay Crece Contigo (http:/ /crececontigo.opp.gub.uy/),  Chile Crece Contigo (http:/ /www.crececontigo.gob.cl/) and  De Cero a Siempre (http:/ /www.deceroasiempre.gov.co/).  Moreover, the World Bank, as part of is SABER initiative  (Systems Approach for Better Education Results - http:/ / saber.worldbank.org/ ), recognises that ‘ECE exists within a  larger [social, cultural and political] context’ and points to  the importance of coordinated ECD approaches that span  ‘education, health, protections and social welfare’, requiring 
33 32 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeG20 governments can and should take decisive  action, taking a three-pronged approach:  upporting the systemic turn in early childhood  development, education and care I. Initiate and support measures that make systemic  approaches sustainable In order to build sustainable and effective early childhood development, education and care services, G20 governments should: 1. Systematically develop national (i.e. State) policy  frameworks and strategies that reach beyond electoral  cycles and policies of a specific government. In order to  be sustainable, the frameworks need to be strong enough  to resist changes in government and administration; 2. proactively initiate, support and resource multidimensional networks of all actors involved in developing  and providing ECD services at all levels of government: local, regional and national; 3. systematically take into account and build on the  capabilities, desires, aspirations and needs of all families  and communities. Integrated ECDEC programmes should  always aim at empowering and supporting, never at  supplanting families; 4. always conceptualise and develop ECDEC programmes  and services as universal services for all children and  families in order to avoid stigmatisation of services  targeted at disadvantaged groups as services for the  poor. Within a universal system additional resources can  and should then be allocated according to specific needs  (progressive universalism); 5. support a systemic qualification framework: shared  approaches to professional preparation, qualification, • Practice(s) • Values At all levels of a Competent System, actors require a sound  body of knowledge (e.g. about the purpose and aims of ECDEC,  about children’s rights, democracy, about the importance of  addressing diversity, equality, and social justice). At present,  individual and institutional actors with different roles and  professional backgrounds often operate on the basis of distinct bodies of knowledge (e.g. pedagogical, medical, legal,  administrative). Shared knowledge and understanding across  the entire system is the precondition for the development  of shared and matching practices. If, for instance, national  policy frameworks expect practitioners to work with children  and families in rights–based, non-discriminatory, culturally  appropriate and participatory ways, matching practices are  required by administrators, by local, regional and national  policy makers, in professional preparation, evaluation etc.  Systemic and rights-based practices (at all levels of the  system) develop on the basis of shared orienting values. It is a  crucial task to enable systematic encounters and democratic  dialogue between all stakeholders in order to raise awareness  of own and others’ values, and to work towards a shared  orientation towards rights, equality, and social justice for all  children and families. The need to coordinate not only within one professional  system (early education) but across several professional and  disciplinary systems in ECDEC adds to the complexity of  the task. Education, primary healthcare, nutrition, children’s rights, social cohesion, equality and other aspects that  contribute to the ECD/ECEC system are often grounded in  different, and not necessarily matching, conceptualisations,  understandings, terminologies and accepted practices.  Bringing them together in a Competent System requires  targeted action at systems level that G20 governments  should seek to provide.
35 34 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agecommitment and success. G20 countries in other regions,  on the other hand, are operating on a much broader  understanding of ‘integrated services’ that comprise health  and well-being, nutrition, education, social cohesion and  reconciliation, and equality. Excellent examples for such  approaches can be found in Latin America. Governments should draw on the wealth and diversity of  policy and practice approaches within the G20 group and  initiate systematic learning: 1. proactively initiate, support and resource cross-national  exchange and networking between policy makers,  practitioners, ECD advocates, and researchers in order  to make successful and forward-looking approaches to  holistic ECD/ECEC services in the global south accessible  to stakeholders in other countries 2. encourage and equip these cross-national initiatives to  systematically explore possible shared understandings  across differences, with particular attention to questions of purpose and values that underpin approaches to ECD/ECEC services (e.g. public good vs. private responsibilities) 3. Enable and resource cross-national, cross-professional  and cross-disciplinary initiatives to explore and develop  shared bodies of knowledge, shared practices, and first  and foremost shared concepts and language. III. Embrace and support systemic approaches to  ECD/ECEC governance, policy implementation, and evaluation Competent Systems require new approaches to governance,  policy implementation and evaluation. Overcoming traditional  and often simplistic understandings remains a major challenge.  Governance theory and systems theory have shown that topdown approaches to policy implementation don’t work, and and continuous professional development across all  practitioners and professionals working with young  children, families and communities including (but not  limited to) health workers, childcare workers, educators  and teachers; 6. initiate processes to include the roles, competences and  professional profile of facilitators for such networks into  the professional role profiles of ECD/ECEC personnel, and  initiate, commission and adequately resource ‘systems  research [that] looks beyond evaluation of individual  programs and policies (beyond “proximate causes” of child outcomes)’ with a view on how to take systemic  ECD/ECEC approaches to scale (Powers & Paulsell, 2018). II. Initiate and support joint learning from and with  forward-looking ECD/ECEC initiatives across G20 countries ECDEC contexts and needs of diverse communities differ  widely in individual countries and across the G20 group.  Countries have developed a wealth of approaches to meet  the needs of these diverse communities. While life situations  of young children and their families and communities are  always specific, concrete and local, there are also shared  experiences across country contexts, and increasingly  across the global south and global north. They include often  traumatic experiences, e.g. with migration and displacement,  marginalisation and exclusion of minority and indigenous  groups, poverty, malnutrition and other issues affecting  the wellbeing of young children. Even in the most affluent  G20 countries an increasing number of children are growing  up under conditions that some (arrogantly and entirely  inappropriately) still call ‘third world conditions’. Many G20 countries in Europe and North America have  attempted to integrate the early education and care aspects  of early childhood services, albeit with varying levels of 
37 36 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agethat the only way to influence (‘govern’) a complex system  is through influencing and shaping its context (Pressman  & Wildavsky, 1984; Willke, 1998). However, in ECD/ECEC  the standard mode of governance often tends to follow an  implicit top-down logic: Step one involves developing policy  (often based on research evidence and/or internationally  accepted ‘best practice’); step two involves devising an  implementation strategy (‘from theory to practice’). This,  ideally, is followed by step three which comprises measures  to assess the effectiveness of the policy at ground level. Not only are such models overly simplistic; they lend  themselves to inappropriately and evidently ineffective  technocratic approaches aimed at managing professional  performance regulating autonomous professional practice and measuring only predetermined outcomes. Competent Systems in ECD/ECEC thrive on the agency of all  actors and stakeholders: children and families, practitioners,  community leaders (‘elders’), scholars, administrators, policy  makers all shape the early childhood system through their  everyday (inter-)actions. Inevitably, they all bring their own readings and interpretations of national policy frameworks  into the picture. Herein lies a tremendous opportunity to make  use of what the Brazilian author Roberto M. Unger (2005)  calls democratic experimentalism. In consequence, G20  governments should proactively encourage the shift from linear (‘top-down’) approaches to ECD/ECEC policy making  and implementation to circular processes that systematically  connect policy development, implementation/interpretation  at local and regional level with careful systemic evaluation  that feeds back into the policy making cycle.Policy Practice ImplementationTop-down ‘implementation’? Or democratic invention of social change? (Roberto Mangabeira Unger)Interests and (best) intentions Research (‘evidence base’) Frustration (‘it never works...’)Assessment (e.g ‘measuring’ quality, outcomes and effectiveness) International and national  policy priorities and agencies (e.g. UNESCO, World Bank) Own historiy, culture,  values individual and group identity Local knowledge(s)  and practices Resistance Creativity ‘Grassroots’ Competent Systems: for social justice, diversity and equalityForward  planning Better understanding Evaluation Research and critical inquiryCreative InventionImplementation Interpretation
39 38 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeCentro de Estudios Sociales (CES). Bogotá D.C.: Universidad  Nacional de Colombia. Durán-Strauch, E. y Torrado-Pacheco, M. (Eds.) (2017).  Políticas de infancia y adolescencia ¿Camino a la equidad?  Colección Centro de Estudios Sociales (CES). Bogotá D.C.:  Universidad Nacional de Colombia. OECD. (2001). Starting Strong. Early Childhood Education  and Care. Paris: OECD. Powers, S., & Paulsell, D. (2018). Strengthening Early Learning with  a Systems Approach: Diagnostic strategies with an application to  over-age enrollment. Paper presented at the Comparative and  International Education Society annual conference, Mexico City.  Pressman, J. L., & Wildavsky, A. B. (1984). Implementation: How  Great Expectations in Washington are Dashed in Oakland: Or,  why It’s Amazing that Federal Programs Work at All, this Being  a Saga of the Economic Development Administration as Told  by Two Sympathetic Observers who Seek to Build Morals on  a Foundation of Ruined Hopes. Berkely, CA: Colegio Nacional de Ciencias Políticas y Administración Pública: Fondo de  cultura económica. Republic of Colombia. (2013). Early Childhood Comprehensive  Care Strategy. Political, Technical and Management  Fundamentals. Bogotá, Colombia: Office of the President. Roth, A.N. (2006). Discurso sin compromiso. La política  pública de derechos humanos en Colombia. Bogotá:  Ediciones Aurora. Unger, R. M. (2005). What should the Left propose? London:  Verso. Urban, M. (2012). Researching Early Childhood Policy and  Practice. A Critical Ecology. European Journal of Education,  47(4), 494-507. doi:10.1111/ejed.120121. Initiate, resource and document ECD/ECEC policypractice cycles that follow and build on successful  documented examples, e.g. the Centres of Innovation  programme in New Zealand and the current Centres of  Excellence initiative in the Province of Ontario, Canada 2.  From national government level, initiate and support  the development of local (‘grassroots’) ECD/ECEC Competent Systems, drawing on existing expertise, e.g.  in Colombia (Ruta Integral de Atenciones) Initiate, commission and resource systemic, participatory  evaluation of local processes in the context of national ECD/ ECEC policy frameworks. References Cardini, Alejandra & Guevara, Jennifer (in press). EL LUGAR DEL CURRÍCULUM EN LA PRIMERA INFANCIA: APORTES  DE UNA MIRADA COMPARADA. Revista currículum y  profesorado. Cardini, A., Díaz Langou, G., Guevara, J., & De Achával, O.  (2017) Enseñar, cuidar y criar al mismo tiempo: el desafío  para las políticas públicas de infancia en Argentina. Vol. 167.  Documentos de trabajo. Buenos Aires: CIPPEC. Comisión Intersectoral para la Atención Integral de la Primera  Infancia. (2013). Fundamentos Políticos Técnicos y de Gestión.  Bogotá D.C. Council of the European Union. (2011). Council conclusions of  15 June 2011 on early childhood education and care: providing  all our children with the best start for the world of tomorrow.  Brussels: Official Journal of the European Union. Durán-Strauch, E. (2017). Integralidad y políticas locales de  infancia y adolescencia ¿Camino a la equidad? Colección 
41 40 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeUrban, M. (2014). Learning from the Margins: Early childhood  imaginaries, ‘normal science’, and the case for a radical  reconceptualisation of research and practice. In M. Bloch, B.  B. Swadener, & G. S. Cannella (Eds.), Reconceptualizing Early  Childhood Care and Education: Critical Questions, Diverse  Imaginaries and Social Activism. New York: Peter Lang. Urban, M. (2015). Compromiso y Responsibilidad de Todos.  Europe and Latin America learning from and with each other  for Competent Systems in early childhood.  Retrieved from  http:/ /reciprocamente.eurosocial-ii.eu/en/ United Nations. (2017). The Sustainable Development Goals  Report 2017. New York: United Nations. Urban, M., Vandenbroeck, M., Van Laere, K., Lazzari, A.,  & Peeters, J. (2011). Competence requirements in early  childhood education and care. Final report. Brussels: European  Commission. Directorate General for Education and Culture. Urban, M., Vandenbroeck, M., Van Laere, K., Lazzari, A., &  Peeters, J. (2012). Towards Competent Systems in Early Childhood Education and Care. Implications for Policy and  Practice. European Journal of Education, 47(4), 508-526.  doi:10.1111/ejed.12010 Willke, H. (1998). Systemtheorie III: Steuerungstheorie  - Grundzüge einer Theorie der Steuerung komplexer  Sozialsysteme (2 ed.). Stuttgart: Lucius & Lucius. Woodhead, M. (1996). In Search of the Rainbow. Pathways to  Quality in Large-Scale Programmes for Young Disadvantaged  Children. The Hague: Bernhard van Leer Foundation. Working Group on Early Childhood Education and Care.  (2014). Proposal for principles of a Quality Framework for  Early Childhood Education and Care. Retrieved from Brussels: http:/ /ec.europa.eu/education/policy/strategic-framework/ archive/documents/ecec-quality-framework_en.pdfWorld Bank. (2011). Learning for All. Investing in People’s  Knowledge and Skills to Promote Development. World Bank  Group Education Strategy 2020. Washington DC: World  Bank.
The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age Redesigning education landscapes  for the future of work: third-space literacies and alternative learning models  Cristóbal Cobo (Center for Research - Ceibal Foundation)  Alessia Zucchetti (Center for Research - Ceibal Foundation)Axel Rivas (CIPPEC) 
45 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbstract Technology-driven transformations are redefining the role  of education, the value of knowledge and skills. Non-formal  learning, third-space literacies and alternative mechanisms  for certification are emerging throughout the world, aiming  to prepare youth for entering the job market. If non-formal mechanisms continue to expand, the role of  the State, other actors and the G20 in education also need  to be reassessed. This includes dimensions such as regional  and global articulation, regulation, certification of non-formal  education, among others. The scope of the policy brief is to provide recommendations to  bridge the gap between schooling, learning and employability  at a global scale.   Challenge Educational systems are facing diverse challenges worldwide.  Some of those still respond to long-term needs such as  increasing global access to education for all and across  all levels; reducing dropout and securing completion of  mandatory schooling. But there are many challenges that  define a new educational landscape: the definition of the  curricular priorities in a changing world, the development of  new skills, the non-formal or third-space literacies (beyond  school and home) in a digital decentralized environment,  the role of the State promoting equity in the face of large  inequalities and the digital divide. The past two decades have also witnessed the cross-cutting  transformation brought by ICT and the Internet first, followed  by the integration of digital technologies across the economy  and society. As automation and artificial intelligence  increasingly permeate and transform the labour market, they  redefine several areas. The role of education in human capital 
47 46 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeProposal The landscape of education is much more diverse, complex  and dynamic than it was when the first alternative online  learning models emerged. Although some of the third space  literacy examples referred to in Table 1 are initiatives oriented  to benefit those who are learning in deprived environments,  others are not. Therefore, it is important to assess and  understand if those opportunities can be considered as  alternatives to formal education and what challenges they  present for educational equity. The changing landscape  briefly described here requires a redefinition of the role of  the State and other actors in educational policy-making  to guarantee an expanded vision of the right to education  beyond formal and traditional learning. Are these alternative forms of learning a threat in terms  of equity and established educational traditions or an  opportunity for expanding the right to education? Should the  State use, control, regulate or replace new institutions that  provide learning opportunities beyond the traditional context  of education? How can the State guarantee educational  quality in this context?  How should the State support these emerging opportunities  of third space literacies as platforms that can upskill individuals  without diminishing/affecting the role developed by existing  formal education institutions? Vision 1.a  These alternative forms of learning have the potential to  facilitate innovation across the educational system and to close  the gap between learning, schooling and employability. The  State should expand what today is conceived as “educational  system”; promote new collaborative, open policies and  discussions gathering all stakeholders. G20 has the potential  to act as an articulator, leading the process and promoting formation (World Development Report, 2018, p.40), is one of  those, along with the structure, institutions and mechanisms  that have been in place for addressing societal needs.  Across every region and regardless of countries’ Human  Development Index (HDI) or the Gross Domestic Product  (GDP), knowledge, skills, learning and schooling are being  redefined. Knowledge has an increasing value as a currency;  however, its relevance is linked to what an individual is able  to do with that knowledge. Critical skills in today’s society  are also facing an accelerated process of relevance and  redefinition.  This landscape requires to analyse and address interrelated  factors as the increasing distance between formal education  (i.e. at secondary level) and the labour market needs, the  need to provide flexible and lifelong learning opportunities  for upskilling and reskilling the workforce, as well as rethinking  the relevance and future role of formal education, learning  and knowledge.  In this context, non-formal learning, third-space literacies  (beyond school and home spaces) and alternative mechanisms  for upskilling and certification are emerging throughout the  world, specially across technology-oriented areas such as  coding, online services, technical support, etc. E-learning  and blended learning services, as well as open educational  resources and massive open courses are designed or  implemented beyond formal education settings and as such,  they do not necessarily issue traditional or recognized forms  of certification (see Gibson et al 2015), technical or academic  degree. While these models are not new, their popularity  and relevance have exponentially grown. Moreover, the latter appear to be more effective than formal educational  mechanisms for securing employability and preparing youth  for entering a demanding and increasingly competing job  market, especially in technology and ICT-related fields. 
49 48 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeNo single actor has neither the capacity nor the resources to  address these issues by itself. Moreover, there is a clear risk  of having obsolete educational systems unable to respond to  societal needs, along with a growing number of low quality  or unregulated training opportunities. From this perspective,  exploring alternative forms of learning demands adopting  novel models of accountability, monitoring and ensuring  quality as a way to reconceptualise educational policy. The State can still play a key role in leading this process,  facilitating and opening up its mechanisms and structures to  include alternative models. Educational policy-making would  need to assess whether regulatory mechanisms that respond  to formal instruction would be suitable for alternative learning  opportunities. This implies working with the “third space” in  education (beyond formal school and home). The State could  offer, promote and encourage the adoption of platforms,  resources, courses and certificates. This more flexible  understanding of what is conceived as education could be a  valuable opportunity to expand learning possibilities for the  population. The role of public entities should not be limited to  “producing” contents, but making them available for a larger sector of the population. The State should redefine its role by  mixing production of digital education, buying author rights  of digital content to ensure equity and public access, and  define long-term dynamic strategies that create platforms to  circulate new forms of education and certification.  One of the key challenges is how to ensure that resources  provided by the State as an expanded form of public digital  education are high-quality and also relevant to support  knowledge and skills development that address labour market  needs. Top-down (e.g. government quality or certification  agencies) but also bottom-up (e.g. employers’ associations,  alumni association among other forms of crowdsourcing  accountability) mechanisms of credibility and transparency  are needed.the adoption of holistic and comprehensive policies in this  new landscape. Recommendation 1.a  What is at stake is significant. According to McKinsey , “the  global economy could face a potential surplus of 90 million to  95 million low-skill workers and a shortage of about 38 to 40  million high-skill workers by 2020”1. It we take those figures  into account, it is critical to facilitate, support and promote  the diversification of learning, upskilling and reskilling  opportunities along with flexible certification mechanisms.  This requires a holistic approach focused on formal and nonformal education alike, -including but not limited- to promote  a higher degree of harmonization of educational systems on a  global scale and to foster the development of internationally  recognized accreditation mechanisms for informal and  non-formal education opportunities2. G20 could encourage  international organizations and national governments to  provide more flexible ways of recognizing prior qualifications  regardless of where they were developed. Exploring the potential of alternative learning models for  raising human capital, upskilling and reskilling the workforce,  requires all actors -from the State to private companies, civil  society and academia- to discuss their respective roles; to  generate quality-learning opportunities for acquiring new  and market-related skills and knowledge; and to recognize  new forms of learning that can eventually enrich future formal  and informal education.  1 Sebastien Turbot, Education to Employment: Boost Skills, Bridge  the Gap, 2018, [Website] https:/ /www.forbes.com/sites/sebastienturbot/2016/01/28/education-employment-skills-gap/#43ecb0c7641b  (accessed the 13th May 2018).  2 For more information see T20 (2017) Solutions for the G20, [Website]   http:/ /www.t20germany.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/07/20_Solutions_for-the_G20_17-7.pdf (accessed the 19th June 2018).  
51 50 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeState should explore different paths to institutionalize new  learning environments and to promote the principles of equity  and inclusion in particular for securing quality educational  interventions for underserved and under-skilled communities,  as well as for youth who are outside formal education systems  as stated by the work of the T20 in the area (T20, 2017).  At least, two possibilities should be explored simultaneously.  For one side, it is required to diversify the public offer  of educational resources and self-administered learning  experiences in order to go far beyond the formal settings.  On the other side, it is necessary to assess how the formal  system promotes, updates and recognizes the so called 21st  century skills in the curricular frameworks and implementation  resources (platforms, courses, printed books, teachers’  guides and training, etc). Additionally, it is critical to promote  continuous skills development and a dynamic redefinition of  curricular priorities in a changing world. Curriculum areas of  ministries of education play a key role in this chapter. Vision 1.c  It is time to adopt new parameters and tools for validation  and recognition. It is necessary to move away from traditional  forms of classifying and certifying learning (formal, nonformal, informal)3 towards new ways of valuing learning.  Recommendation 1.c “Formal” and “informal learning” should gradually evolve and transition towards mechanisms that help us understand  the difference between “learning to live” and “learning to  3 For more information on formal, non-formal and informal learning see  Patrick, W. (2010). Recognising non-formal and informal learning outcomes, policies and practices: Outcomes, policies and practices (Vol.  2009, No. 35). OECD publishing.In this context, the G20 is well-positioned to act as an  articulator, leading States through the redefinition process of  education systems, employability and the labour market. The  experience of the T20 since the German Presidency in 2017,  highlights the need and relevance of promoting the adoption  of comprehensive and flexible labour market policies;  facilitating skills transfer, recognition and validation; fostering  the development of alternative and non-formal education  opportunities for youth; and closing the distance between  formal schooling and employability (T20, 2017; IMF Annual  Meetings, 2017).   Vision 1.b  In the 21st century it is essential to develop a broad set of  skills and competencies. Flexible learning opportunities can  respond to this need and easily adapt to a changing job  market and rethink the role of education in an increasingly  complex society. What kind of curricular vision and priorities  should be promoted?  Recommendation 1.b  Broadly speaking but particularly in the most conservative educational models, most learning experiences have been  primarily focused on the acquisition and memorization of  contents (discipline-based), which only offer a reduced  dimension of learning experience. Only if a broader  perspective is adopted, it will be possible to include a larger  set of capabilities which play a critical role in terms of  employability as well as an opportunity to enhance a more  democratic citizenship. Today’s formal education should learn from the flexibility  and adaptability that informal learning offers, otherwise the  risk of obsolescence is significantly high. At the same time,  informal learning is fragile and tends to be private-driven. The 
53 52 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age‘Third space literacies’ are generally defined as the area  between official curriculum and informal knowledge, with  skills and dispositions brought in from outside culture (Potter  and McDougall 2017). Alternative and non-formal models in  education are likely to increase inequalities by favouring a  few while affecting others. As the Matthew effect indicates,  those already advantaged are more likely to benefit first and  most from additional resources. For instance, during the first  years of expansion of MOOCS, evidence suggests that the  most active learners (as well as those who completed the  courses) were those who had previous academic degrees  or were already enrolled in university. Similarly, as it was  documented during the emergence of open courses at OCW  MIT in the previous decade (DeMillo, R. A., & Young, A. J.,  2015), those who had already had access to education and/ or to the required “social capital” were those who benefitted  the most when knowledge became open and available (Losh,  E., 2014). At large, many countries and regions are in a situation of  profound education inequality that negatively impacts their  possibilities to reach quality education. The expansion of learning through digital tools can favour -first and foremost-  those who have the access to technical infrastructure  (Internet access, digital skills, etc.) as well as to ‘social capital’  needed to pursue their own learning interests or needs. In  order to overcome these learning inequalities, it is essential  that public and private entities create regional alliances to  promote and enable not only access to digital basic resources  (connectivity and devices), but also the needed proficiency  to use digital platforms and online resources. G20 should  continue the push to enhance international efforts to develop  accredited non-formal education, providing accelerated  learning opportunities for youth who are not eligible for  formal schooling (T20, 2017). Hence, it is important to adopt comprehensive and  flexible approaches that provide basic access to resources  -technological, digital and educational-, and also foster earn a living” set of skills. From this perspective, secondary and postsecondary education can be shaped more  closely to specific employment outcomes (i.g. work-study  programs, early job-oriented counselling, internships, and  apprenticeships). Rather than distinguishing between critical  and non-critical capacities (e.g. 21st century skills are usually  considered as valuable capacities), the emphasis could be  placed on what kind of learning experiences is able to reinforce  learners’ employability level (regardless if s/he is a student  or a worker). This could also show how learning experiences  are able to improve learners’ working opportunities. Having  this in mind, alternative and more flexible credentialing and  licensing tools can be issued regardless of the settings in which  learning happens. This can enrich contexts, and encourage  flexibility and mobility of those who want to acquire a new  knowledge/skill without sacrificing its recognition. Vision 1.d  Third-space literacies and alternative learning models have the potential to enhance innovation in education for the  digital age. However, this can only be achieved if education  inequalities are addressed. Digital education offers a path  towards that goal.  Recommendation 1.d Education as a basic human right requires having access  to the same -at least basic- learning opportunities for all  individuals across the globe (World Development Bank,  2018). Education enables societies to reduce inequalities,  raise human capital and promote social mobility. Equality is  enshrined in the scope of education, as well as the main pillar  for the role that the State has played in it. While access to  critical knowledge generates wealth and potentially increases  economic opportunities, its lack of, generates exclusion and  dependence. 
55 54 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age8. Sebastien Turbot, Education to Employment: Boost Skills,  Bridge the Gap, 2018, [Website] https:/ /www.forbes.com/ sites/sebastienturbot/2016/01/28/education-employmentskills-gap/#43ecb0c7641b (accessed the 13th May 2018).  9. T20 (2017). Solutions for the G20, [Website] http:/ /www. t20germany.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/07/20_Solutions_ for-the_G20_17-7.pdf (accessed the 19th June 2018). 10. World Bank (2018).  World Development Report 2018:  Learning to realize education promise. Washington DC:  World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1096-1. License: Creative  Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO.the development of metacognitive capacities of learners,  enabling them to pursue and develop their own learning.  Otherwise the risk is -once again- to benefit only a few who  are probably in a better condition to develop their own  lifelong learning strategies.  References 1. DeMillo, R. A., & Young, A. J. (2015). Revolution in higher  education: How a small band of innovators will make college  accessible and affordable. Mit Press. 2. Eliana Osborn, “Edublocks” Could Change How We Learn  by Adapting Bitcoin Model to Continued Education,2018  [Website], https:/ /www.goodcall.com/news/edublockschange-learn-adapting-bitcoin-model-continuededucation-06554 (accessed the 13th May 2018). 3. Gibson, D., Ostashewski, N., Flintoff, K., Grant, S., & Knight,  E. (2015). Digital badges in education. Education and  Information Technologies, 20(2), 403-410. 4. IMF Annual Meetings (2017). Group of Twenty G-20  Report on strong, sustained and balanced growth, [Website]  https:/ /www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/2017/100617.pdf   (accessed the 19th June 2018).  5. Losh, E. (2014). The war on learning: Gaining ground in the  digital university. MIT Press. 6. Macià, M., & García, I. (2016). Informal online communities  and networks as a source of teacher professional development:  A review. Teaching and Teacher Education, 55, 291-307. 7. Patrick, W. (2010). Recognising non-formal and informal  learning outcomes, policies and practices: Outcomes, policies  and practices (Vol. 2009, No. 35). OECD publishing.
57 56 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageskill, competency, or interest. They can be used to  represent online and offline achievements, communicate  successes, or mastering certain skills. They can support  learning that happens beyond traditional classrooms  such as alternative and flexible credentials that substitute  traditional certification, demonstrated outcomes / validated competencies that are tailored to the desired  output from a variety of learning contexts. They provide  a reputation framework for peer validation, capturing  technical skills along the path of program completion,  document the learner’s ability to use a piece of equipment  or demonstrate knowledge of a particular topic. Badges,  for instance, are becoming novel currencies that provide  verified, specific information from trusted sources about  the skills, competencies and knowledge. Samples are:  Open Badges, Blockcerts, Edublocks, etc7.   7 The Institute of the Future and ACT Foundation shred their view on  how employee-centered learning might look like. The concept involves  Edublocks -one-hour chunks of learning from virtually any source or  context. These blocks are held in individual accounts. Learners can  share and trade these Edublocks once acquired using some a cryp-tographic system (like the digital currency Bitcoin). Eliana Osborn, “Edublocks” Could Change How We Learn by Adapting  Bitcoin Model to Continued Education, 2018 [Website], https:/ /www. goodcall.com/news/edublocks-change-learn-adapting-bitcoin-mo-del-continued-education-06554 (accessed the 13th May 2018). Grech, A., & Camilleri, A. F. (2017). Blockchain in Education (No. JRC108255). Joint Research Centre, Seville site publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/JRC108255/jrc108255_blockchain_in_education%281%29.pdf (accessed the 15th May 2018). Appendix Table 1. There is an increasing variety and number of third space  literacies, digital and/or non-formal learning opportunities.  The cases mentioned below, represent well known  examples and alternative opportunities for training,  upskilling and certification. • Digital and/or non-formal learning or training  opportunities: there is an emergence of alternative  forms of learning which run parallel to the formal  education. They offer different venues for learning  and skilling, going from experiences that take place  outside formally structured, institutionally sponsored,  classroom-based activities (Macià & García, 20164).  Some remarkable examples worldwide are: Agastya International Foundation (India), School 42 5 (France  and USA), Alison6 (Ireland), Distance Learning in the  Amazon Forest (Brazil), Generation you employed  (several countries), Jóvenes a Programar (Uruguay),  Coursera, Udacity, SkillShare, Lynda and similar (online). • Social (peer-based) recognition of uncertified knowledge: These alternative certificates represent  different forms or indicators of an accomplishment,  4 Macià, M., & García, I. (2016). Informal online communities and networks as a source of teacher professional development: A review. Teaching  and Teacher Education, 55, 291-307. 5 42 is a free of charge computer training program, open to anyone -whether they possess an academic degree or not-. Candidates are selected through a highly competitive selection process. Students have a leading  role in their learning experience through project-based learning challenges. For more information visit www..42.fr (accessed the 13th May 2018).  6 Alison provides over 1,000 free courses to eleven million registered learners over the world, reaching 1.5 million graduates of its courses. Alison offers free learning, certification, learning management and publishing to  anyone interested. For more information visit www.wise-qatar.org/sites/default/files/2018_wise_awards_brochure.pdf (accessed the 13th May 2018). 
The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age Bridging the Education-Workforce Divide:  Strategies to Meet Ever Changing Needs and Mitigate Future Inequalities Claudia Costin (Getulio Vargas Foundation) Allan Michel Jales Coutinho (Getulio Vargas Foundation)
61 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbstract To build the workforce of the future and diminish future  inequalities within and among countries, educational systems  must close the Education-Workforce Divide. In other words,  they must integrate unforeseeable social and work demands  into schools’ practices and resources to ensure that students,  especially those from impoverished backgrounds, develop the  skills1 to participate in their local and national economies and  democracies. In this context, equal emphasis must be allocated to competency based curriculum reforms, teacher professional  development and evaluation mechanisms in order for G20  countries to timely and equitably bridge the Divide and meet  the needs and aspirations of the children of the future.  Challenge Recent G20 communiques of 20172 have addressed key issues  related to the future of work, specifically issues related to  digital innovations and labor market transformations. Yet, little  attention has been given to supply mechanisms responsible  to build the needed competencies and skills to address the  volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous transformations  in labor markets and society as a whole: school systems.  To bridge the Education-Workforce Divide and mitigate  future inequalities, supporting functions must be in place to  tailor and improve curriculum redesign processes and teacher  professional development at all levels of education across  G20 countries. Such mechanisms must be implemented to  support the work of teachers and provide children and youth  with opportunities for deep learning and skills development  as part of students’ basic school life cycles.  1 We refer to skills as the set of cognitive and social emotional attributes  that one person develops over the life cycle to successfully perform activities, complete tasks and contribute to society either collaboratively  or individually. 2 http:/ /www.g20-insights.org/policy_area/future-of-work/
63 62 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAlthough it is unclear how much disruptions one must expect  from these shifts, certain estimations point out to a 60 per cent  job automatization by 2030 (Balliester & Elsheikhi, 2018).  The Education-Workforce Divide currently affects youth and  children and may become a greater pressing issue for G20  countries in years to come. The global youth unemployment  rate was 13.1 percent in 2017 (International Labor Organization,  2017), and three out of four youth who were employed worked  in the informal economy (International Labor Organization,  2017), which may increase the vulnerability of the poor  due to a paucity of safety nets (World Bank, 2013, p. 129).  Moreover, according to International Labor Organization  estimations, more than one-fifth of youth are not employed  or developing any kind of educational or training activity  (ILO, 2017). Together with unmalleable school systems and  rapidly market changes, such estimations may skyrocket and  create unforeseeable social and economic challenges for  G20 societies and democracies. Recognizing that labor market disruptions will continue to shape  G20 economies, that the transition from school to work may become increasingly difficult, and that policymakers have the  capacity to craft educational policies to support school systems  to become malleable and prepare students to deal with such  complexity, this policy brief draws recommendations for G20  countries to tailor and improve curriculum redesign processes,  teacher professional development and evaluation mechanisms.  These are three key policy areas that, altogether, may support  G20 countries to support educational systems become more  malleable, narrowing the Education-Workforce Divide and  providing children and youth with high-quality resources for  skills development during their basic school life cycle. Proposal Basic education is one of the few paths that vulnerable children have out of poverty (World Bank 2013). Thus, G20 The Education-Workforce Divide is characterized by two  factors. Firstly, by the paucity of malleability of school  systems to adapt to rapidly changing economies and  equip students with different bundles of skills. Secondly,  the divide is characterized by unprecedented labor market  developments resulting from novel trends such as automation  and technological advancements.  On one hand, with comparative data from instruments such  as PISA (Programme for International Student Evaluation),  one can observe that many nation-states are still learning to  implement the needed reforms and compensatory measures  to create malleable school environments where children are  able to learn, build, and, most importantly, apply basic and  high order cognitive, as well as socioemotional skills, to solve  complex problems in unfamiliar settings.  For instance, an average of 28% of students in OECD countries  are only able to solve straightforward collaborative problems  (Guria 2016), which may hinder their ability to elaborate  on the multifaceted problems of today’s world and build  solutions for these problems at work and in their communities.  Likewise, since 2009, the proportion of students who attain  the basic level of proficiency in reading, which are key to  comprehend the world, communicate effectively and develop  other competencies, has stagnated in member countries  comprising the Organization for Economic Cooperation  and Development (OECD) (Guria 2016). Lastly, the data  also points out to the fact that socioeconomic status across  countries can be predictor of achievement (OECD 2016).  This suggests that schools systems have not fully created  nurturing environments for skills development and that  schooling is not matching the needs of many populations to  build and hope for a better future. On the other hand, technological changes promote labor market  disruptions that widens the very Education-Workforce Divide,  creating further challenges for democracies as a result of higher inequality rates (International Labour Organization, 2018). 
65 64 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agecurricula, providing teachers with time, teaching resources  and space for collaboration to hone teaching practices that  can truly enhance and shape students’ knowledge and skills,  in addition to evaluation mechanisms that can inform such  practices across G20 countries. Vision for School Malleability: Aligning and  Fostering Curriculum Redesign Processes,  Teacher Professional Development and Evaluation  Mechanisms. As pointed out by the challenge section of this policy brief,  labor markets, technological and societal advancements are  ever changing. For school systems across G20 countries to  truly support the development of students, it is pivotal G20  countries create curriculum committees and assign them  to each International Standard Classification of Education  (ISCED) level, specifically levels 0-3, which corresponds to  Early Childhood, Primary and Secondary Education. ISCED  Curriculum Committees should work in partnership with  teachers, labor unions and the education sector and convene  periodically to ensure that they are providing a cohesive  educational experiences for skills development and learning  across all levels of education.  To institutionalize this work, these committees must be  set permanently within the Ministries of Education. Each  ISCED Curriculum Committee should have sub-committees  responsible for at least one stage of the institutional learning  cycle, which allows for ongoing learning. This cycle is  comprised of:countries must ensure that children and youth, especially  vulnerable ones, have opportunities to acquire and develop  different bundles of skills for citizenship and work during Early  Childhood, Primary and Secondary Education. To accomplish  this, it is pivotal that school systems become malleable  to societal and market signals and prepare students to  contribute to the development of their communities civically  and economically.  It is in this context that curriculum reform and teacher  professional development become central to close the  Education-Workforce Divide. With the support of highquality resources in schools - especially a curriculum that is able to develop the whole child and teacher professional  development tailored to developing skills - children and  youth may become more likely to deal with the complexity of  today’s and tomorrow’s world and actively contribute to the  advancement of G20 economies and democracies.  On one hand, the curriculum establishes the kinds of  knowledge and skills to be mastered for civic and economic  participation, as well as the types of activities that children and  youth may experience during their school life cycle to develop  these same skills. On the other hand, teacher professional  development prepares teachers to bring this curriculum to  action and foster these competencies equitably in classrooms.  However, curriculum redesign processes can be treacherous  and teacher professional development mechanisms diverse,  which may not always lead to the expected outcomes.  Moreover, incongruent and divergent evaluation mechanisms  may hinder the process of collaborative learning across G20  countries. Consequently, supporting functions must be in place to  guarantee that curriculum is designed to avoid content  overload while ensuring quality content and equitable  implementation, in addition to timely meeting society’s  social and economic needs. Moreover, teacher professional  development must be aligned with national and subnational 
67 66 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageadvancements to guide skills policy (OECD, n.d). G20  countries could benefit from this inter-ministerial strategy to  inform education policy by using data from resources such  as the Survey of Adult Skills (PIAAC). With the mapping of  skills, the subcommittee can align the curriculum and provide  opportunities for students to develop the competencies  needed to successfully perform prospect jobs and contribute  to societies. The subcommittee should also promote quality  of curriculum content by benchmarking cases of high  performing educational systems within and across G20  countries. Finally, it should curate the curriculum to avoid  content overload, allowing for differentiation and cohesion  across all levels of education. 2. Implementing curriculum and high quality teacher  professional development: After mapping current market and societal demands and  upon the design of each ISCED level curriculum, one possible  approach to conduct this effort is to implement the curriculum  within each ISCED level of education through a step-by-step  approach. This may give educational systems the opportunity to learn from experimental iteration 3 and improve upon their  own experiences, providing schools and teachers with space,  resources and training to effectively enact the curriculum  into classrooms. Each ISCED level subcommittee responsible for  implementation could select and comprise a working group  of high performing teachers to craft detailed lesson plan  models for each subject matter, as well as interdisciplinary  units, emphasizing strategies to foster deep learning and  transferable skills, such as collaboration and critical thinking.  Technology could be used in this context to share these  3 Iteration processes have been documented as a new approach to development, one that could foster state capability. Leading authors include Professors Matt Andrews and Lant Pritchett. See Andrews at all  2017 for more information on iteration.Learning Cycle Model 1) Mapping, benchmarking, curating and designing  curriculum; 2)Implementing curriculum and teacher professional  development initiatives; 3)Evaluating curriculum and teacher professional  development initiatives. Successful models of implementation, accounting for  countries’ contexts, could be documented and shared as part  of G20 approach to skills policy development along the years.  Below, we describe how these ISCED level subcommittees  could operate to support school systems to become more  malleable and meet the needs of students entering school  systems.  1. Mapping, benchmarking, curating and designing  curriculum: Organizations such as the OECD have already identified  the need to map market needs, societal and technological 1. Map / Benchmark                 2. ImplementCurate / Design 3. EvaluateISCED LEVEL
69 68 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeThird year of implementation• cohort of educators teaching the first year of ISCED level 3 continues to receive teacher professional development, use and improve the lesson plans developed in year 1. • cohort of educators teaching the second year of  ISCED level 3 uses the resources elaborated on the second year of implementation and participate in teacher professional development. • working group develops lesson plan for the cohort  of educators teaching the third year of ISCED level 3. Fourth year of imple-mentation• Cohort of educators teaching the first and second years of ISCED level 3 teachers continues to receive teacher professional development, use and improve the lesson plans. • Cohort of educators teaching the third year of  ISCED level 3 begin to receive teacher professional development and use the lesson plans in their classrooms. Firth year of implementation• First cohort of students from ISCED level 3 who experienced the curriculum graduate and enter  labor markets, tertiary institutions, etc. Summative  assessments and evaluations point out whether desired bundle of skills and knowledge have been developed in these students. • Subcommittee responsible for mapping  technological, labor market and society needs uses  this data to amend the curriculum for ISCED level 3,  maintaining the cycle of learning. Time Frame ISCED level 3 Year 1 of  implementationYear 2 of  implementationYear 3 of  implementationYear 4 of  implementationYear 5 of  implementation Working  Group Lesson  Plans and Teaching ResourcesPREPARE  lesson plan mod-els and interdis-ciplinary units for cohort of educators teaching the first year of ISCED level 3.PREPARE lesson plan mod-els and interdis-ciplinary units for cohort of educators teaching the sec-ond year of ISCED level 3.PREPARE lesson plan models and inter-disciplin-ary units for cohort of educa-tors teach-ing the third year of ISCED level 3.resources widely throughout the network of head teachers  and educational professionals. These lesson plans would  serve as resources for teacher professional development4  and as inputs for classrooms, and be adapted to schools’  contexts accordingly.  For example, after having a curriculum designed for ISCED  level 3 - which usually corresponds to a three year educational  cycle - a country could strive to close its first learning cycle  within a five year time frame. The first year would serve to  initiate the process of developing lesson plans and other  teaching materials, whereas the last year would serve for  the subcommittee responsible for evaluation analyze the  outcomes of the reform and amend the curriculum, if necessary,  according to new societal, educational and market needs, as  follows:  (ENACTING CURRICULUM WITH TEACHER  PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT)                                                                              ISCED LEVEL 3 IMPLEMENTATION SUBCOMMITTEE  First year of implementation• working group develops lesson plans for cohort of educators teaching the first year of ISCED level 3. Second year of imple-mentation• cohort of educators teaching the first year of ISCED level 3 participates in teacher professional development and utilize lesson plans elaborated on year 1 by the working group. • working group develops lesson plans for the  cohort of educators teaching the second year of ISCED level 3. 4 Teacher professional development must contemplate a few characteristics in order to be effective: it has to be content focused, incorporate active learning as part of their pedagogy, supports collaboration, uses models of effective practice, provides coaching and expert  support, offers feedback and reflection and be of sustained duration (Darling-Hammond, Hyler, & Gardner, 2017).
71 70 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeInstead of implementing the curriculum and closing the  learning cycle, waiting for another major curriculum reform  to take place, this policy brief calls upon G20 countries to  amend and curate the curriculum on an ongoing basis  through established working committees, using available  data and evidence from iterative learning processes to guide  schools as they prepare students to become skilled and  informed citizens of their nation-states. Through iteration,  school systems may be able to mirror the evolving societal,  technological and market developments and better equip  students to live in the world of today and tomorrow.  3. Evaluating curriculum and teacher professional  development initiatives. One of the greatest challenges to promote collective  learning in G20 is measurement cohesion in skills policy. To  comprehensively inform the debate across G20 countries,  it is germane that member states come to an agreement  of which framework they will use to define, monitor and  evaluate skills, especially those placed in the socioemotional  domain. For example, among other matters, governments have to determine whether they will focus on biometric,  psychometric and experimental evaluation methods of social  emotional skills, the frequency in which this data will be  collected, as well as its validity and reliability mechanisms. G20 members can collude and create an index of the types  of bundles of skills that they think are most valuable to the  development of their nation states and collectively support one  another by providing technical expertise to establish cohesive  Monitoring and Evaluation systems. This will the viable to  promote collective learning as G20 members conduct their  own curriculum and teacher professional development reforms  and build their learning cycles. Current initiatives undertaken  by the OECD and the organization Evaldesign could contribute  tremendously to G20 endeavors on this matter.Working  Group Teacher  Profes-sional Develop-mentXCohort of  educators  teaching  the first  year of  ISCED lev el 3 receive  teacher  professional development using  teaching  resources  and APPLY   it in classroomsCohort of  educators  teaching  the second  year of  ISCED level  3 receive  teacher  professional development using  teaching  resources  and APPLY   it in classroomsCohort of  educators  teaching  the third  year of  ISCED lev el 3 receive  teacher  professional development using  teaching  resources  and APPLY   it in classrooms X XCohort of educators teaching the first year of ISCED level 3 continue to receive teacher profession-al develop-ment and IMPROVE teaching resources, applying them in classrooms Cohort of educators teaching the sec-ond year of ISCED level 3 continue to receive teacher profes-sional develop-ment and IMPROVE teaching resources, applying them in class-rooms Cohort of educators teaching the third year of ISCED level 3 continue to receive teacher profession-al develop-ment and IMPROVE teaching resources, applying them in classrooms Working  Group Evaluating and curating EVALUATE   knowledge  and skills of  first cohort  of student who expe-rienced the  curriculum  through a  summative assessment. Amend cur-riculum, if necessary.
72References Andrews, M., Pritchett, L., & Woolcock, M. J. (2017). Building  state capability: Evidence, analysis, action. Oxford: Oxford  University Press. Balliester, T., & Elsheikhi, A. (2018, March). The future of  work: A literature review. International Labour Organization.  Retrieved from http:/ /www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/--dgreports/---inst/documents/publication/wcms_625866.pdf Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M. E., & Gardner, M. (2017).  Effective teacher professional development. Palo Alto, CA:  Learning Policy Institute. G20. (2017). Task Force: The Digitalization [HTML]. Retrieved  April 16, 2018, from http:/ /www.g20-insights.org/policy_area/ future-of-work/ Gurria, A. (2016). Pisa 2015 Results in Focus. PISA in Focus,  (67), 1. International Labour Organization. (2018, February 17).  The Impact of Technology on the Quality and Quantity of Jobs. International Labour Organization. Retrieved from  http:/ /www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/--cabinet/documents/publication/wcms_618168.pdf OECD (2016), PISA 2015 Results (Volume I): Excellence and  Equity in Education, PISA, OECD Publishing, Paris. http:/ / dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264266490-en  OECD. (n.d.). OECD Centre for Skills. OECD Publishing.  Retrieved from https:/ /www.oecd.org/skills/OECD-Centrefor-Skills.pdf World Bank. (2013). World Development Report 2014: Risk  and Opportunity - Managing Risk for Development. The  World Bank. https:/ /doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-9903-3The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age Financing Quality and Equitable  Education in LATAM Javier González (SUMMA) Santiago Cueto (GRADE) Alejandra Cardini (CIPPEC)Bárbara Flores (SUMMA)
75 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbstract Education learning outcomes in low and middle-income  countries are still insufficient and unequally distributed.  Several factors are behind this situation, many of which relate  to education funding: low absolute expenditure per student;  increasing gaps in spending levels between developed and  developing countries; unequal distribution of key education  inputs; inefficient use of pedagogical resources and low levels  of innovation; inadequate political economy frameworks, in  which rich individuals are incentivised to opt out of an already  weakened public sector. Recommendations to deal with  these problems are presented in order to provide not only  more investment, but also a more effective and equitable use  of resources.  Challenge While access to education has improved significantly in Latin  America and the Caribbean (LATAM), levels of learning are  still insufficient and unequally distributed. Several factors  related to education funding are behind this situation: • Absolute per-student spending is insufficient and  below than expected according to LATAM´s economic  development. Although in Latin America during the first  decade of the XXI century public investment in education has increased substantially, both in real terms and as a  percentage of GDP (Rivas, 2015), average expenditure per  student is still significantly lower than in OECD countries.  While the average annual expenditure per student in  OECD countries is US$9,258, it only reaches US$4,076  in Chile, US$3,824 in Brazil, US$2,877 in Mexico and  US$2,459 in Colombia (OECD, 2016). This is relevant since  comparative evidence at secondary education shows that  there is a strong relationship between learning outcomes  and expenditure, up to US$8,000 per student per year  (Vegas and Coffin, 2015). 
77 76 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age(Hanushek, 2001; Murray, Evans and Schwab, 1998).  Furthermore, education systems experience low levels of  innovation and insufficient use of effective pedagogical  practices in the classroom, such as feedback, collaborative  learning, metacognition, etc. (Jacob and Parkinson, 2015;  Johnson et al., 2000; Kingston and Nash, 2011).  • Inadequate and ineffective institutional frameworks  hinder education systems: institutional economics shows  the importance of institutions, understood as formal and  informal rules, for the determination of property rights,  collaboration/competition dynamics, transaction costs,  and social outcomes and their distribution (Acemoglu  and Robinson, 2012; Knight, 1992; North, 1990). These  rules, especially those embodying public regulations,  have a strong impact on education systems. Indeed,  institutions that promote deregulation, marketisation and  privatisation of the education sector, fostering student  selection, vouchers and cost-sharing schemes to fund  primary and secondary education, have had tangible  negative effects on education outcomes, both in terms  of equity and quality in the region due to relevant market failures (González, 2017).  Proposals Given the above challenges actions should be taken on several fronts. Proposal 1: Increase investment through domestic  taxation and reduction of evasion. G20 leaders should encourage governments to invest more  resources per student due to the high social rates of return of  education. This investment should prioritize early childhood  education. In order to achieve this goal, governments need to  increase their education budget, through lower tax evasion • The gap in per-student spending levels is increasing  between developing and developed countries. Although  Latin American countries have increased the levels of  absolute public expenditure in education in the last two  decades, the rate of growth has been lower than the one  observed in leading developed countries. For example,  the annual per-student expenditure gap between Finland  and Chile increased from US$2,995 in 2000 to US$5,116 in  2013 (SUMMA, 2017).  • The distribution of key education inputs is unequal  across schools within Latin American countries. There  is an unequal distribution of the education workforce,  infrastructure, pedagogical materials, ICT, and funding, among other resources, between different social groups,  in terms of socioeconomic status, geographic areas,  and ethnic origin. For example, Bos et al. (2016), based  on PISA 2015, show that richer students are consistently  exposed to more teaching hours and have better-qualified  teachers than their poorer peers. They also find that in  most LATAM countries, headmasters in low-income  schools declare higher levels of concern about the low  quality of their staff, infrastructure and pedagogical  materials, than their peers from high-income schools.  Furthermore, in some cases there is a lack of positive  discrimination mechanisms to prioritize low-income  students. For instance, a study conducted by CIPPEC in  Argentina shows that most educational supplies (free  meals, experienced principals, textbooks, computers,  among others) are distributed homogeneously, without  taking into account the heterogenous socioeconomic  composition and needs of students at recipient schools  (Bezem, 2012).  • The use of resources is inefficient and schools show low levels of pedagogical innovation. Research has  evidenced high rates of teacher absenteeism and  bureaucratic decision-making processes unable to deal  with the increasing complexity of the education system 
79 78 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAlso, the role of civil society organisations in monitoring  progress towards investment goals and advocating for higher  and more efficient investment should be fostered. The cases  of Todos pela Educacao in Brazil and CIPPEC in Argentina are  examples of effective advocacy in this direction. Proposal 2: Promote policies that ensure equitable  investments among students. In order to ensure equitable quality education and improve the  inputs distribution across schools and subnational districts,  changes in education policies are necessary. In particular, G20  leaders should promote the implementation of differentiated  subsidies according to the socioeconomic status of students.  It is essential to establish focalization criteria to deliver  extra funding to excluded groups and underperforming  students. One example is the Chilean Preferential School  Subsidy, which is delivered from the government to schools  for each student who is identified as priority according to  their socioeconomic status. Empirical research has found  positive impact in reducing the socioeconomic achievement  gap (Carrasco et al, 2015). It must be highlighted that this  policy also provides a balanced mix between higher levels of  autonomy and technical support to schools.   In several Latin American countries, research has shown that  a child who is born in a family that is poor, indigenous, lives  in a rural area, has a mother with little or no education, or  a combination of these, will surely attend schools that are  of poorer quality (public or private) and will have lower  educational outcomes (e.g. achievement in standardized tests) than their peers. For example, in Peru the Young Lives  longitudinal study has followed a cohort of children from age  1 year until they turned 15. Another cohort, seven years older,  was also followed up to age 22 years1. The study shows that  1 For more information about the study and publications, see http:/ / younglives.org.uk. and higher direct taxes, which are low in LATAM compared  to OECD, even in historical perspective when controlling by  GDP (González, 2018). Increasing per student spending has been at the forefront of  education policy discussions for years given the positive rates  of returns from investment in education, which are observed  across countries (Becker 1975, 1995; Psacharopoulos 1994,  1995; Cunha and Heckman 2007; Montenegro and Patrinos  2014). Furthermore, empirical evidence demonstrates that  rates of return are particularly high at early years of education  because what is learnt at that stage facilitates future learning.  This dynamic complementarity has been documented by  Heckman (2008) in his seminal paper on schools, skills and  synapses. This evidence suggests that increasing per student  spending should be a policy priority.  In order to finance the extra spending, it is not even necessary  to implement a radical tax reform. In particular, governments  could take advantage of several opportunities that are present  in current tax systems. For example, reviewing the case of  Chile, Arellano and Corbo (2013) argue that implementing an efficient tax and transfer system is feasible by improving the tax  administration, reducing evasion and avoidance, and reducing  exemptions, franchises and special regimes. Nonetheless, we  should be aware that LATAM is lagging behind in terms of  direct taxation, i.e. personal and corporate tax rates (Goñi et  al., 2011). There is also a long way to go in the construction of  more progressive tax systems in the region. Then, the question is: what amount of per student spending  should be publicly financed? Empirical research has shown  that the positive correlation between level of education  spending and student achievement is statistically significant  up to a threshold of US$8,000 per student annually (Vegas  and Coffin, 2015). Above that level of spending, the association  between expenditure and performance is not conclusive  and experts recommend not focusing on resources, but in  improving the way these are invested. 
81 80 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeProposal 3: Encourage the efficient use of  resources, promoting effective pedagogical  practices. In order to maximize the efficient use of public resources,  policy-makers should encourage the implementation of  effective pedagogical practices, which have proved to be  effective to improve students learning at a low cost.  In terms of pedagogical practices, innovation based on  evidence is crucial. SUMMA and the Education Endowment  Foundation (EEF) have been working together in synthesising  global and LATAM regional evidence regarding pedagogical  strategies that have considerable impact on learning outcomes.  Based on more than 10,000 academic articles and 200 metaanalysis, several key classroom strategies have been identified.  Among the most cost effective, it is important to highlight two  strategies: i) Collaborative Learning and ii) Feedback.  Collaborative Learning develops a strategy in which students  work together in small groups in order to develop learning  tasks or activities. This model incentivizes participation  and collaboration among students to reach a common  objective. In the case of Feedback, the practice consists in  giving information to the learner and/or the teacher about  the learner’s performance relative to learning goals. The aim is to redirect actions in order to align efforts and activities.  Empirical evidence demonstrates that this practice has a  positive impact. In fact, compared to a control group, students  whose teacher provides adequate and timely feedback tend  to progress 8 additional months in an academic year in terms  of their learning outcomes. Moreover, this practice is one of  the cheapest to implement, among more than 30 identified  strategies (SUMMA, 2018).  G20 leaders should promote focusing schools’ resources on  these and other effective practices to allow LATAM countries  to catch up several additional months a year, allowing them  to get on track. Nevertheless, this is not likely to happen by by age five, there were already large gaps between children  who were poor and non-poor. These gaps are reduced only  slightly after several years of schooling (Cueto et al, 2016).  One group that has received little attention from research or  policy are children with disabilities, who are in many cases excluded from schools or if included, segregated in special  education schools or attend schools with no specialized  teachers. As a result, it is paramount to strongly invest in pre  and in-service teacher training to guarantee that they acquire  the necessary pedagogical skills needed to adequately face  increasingly higher levels of student diversity in the classroom. Another dimension of inequitable investment occurs in  federal countries, where the gaps between jurisdictions result  in unfair schemes of teacher retribution and other types of  investment. In Argentina, for example, historically-rooted  fiscal inequities are mirrored by inequities in educational  investment, as a result of which some provinces invest per  student almost five times more than others (Rivas & Dborkin,  2018). The compensatory role of National states in these  cases is necessary to build a more homogeneous map of  educational investment.  Finally, full participation of students is yet another challenge  that countries in LATAM must face in order to reduce gaps  in access and learning. In many LATAM countries there is a need for further investments and programs to reduce  school dropout rates and tackle those who abandon school.  Conditional cash transfer programs have played a role in  increasing coverage and attendance, and reducing dropouts,  particularly in secondary schools, although the effects seem  small (Garcia & Saavedra, 2017). Moreover, there is still a need  to invest in the education and development of skills of those  who have not completed secondary education. According to  data from UNESCO from 2015, there are 3 million children  out of school in primary schools and 10 million children out of  secondary schools in LATAM (UNESCO, 2017).
83 82 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAlso, countries would benefit from educational pilot projects  that are rigorously tested and carefully expanded. An example  is the MINEDU Lab, developed by the Ministry of Education in  Peru, which has carefully tested a number of interventions in  that country, in collaboration with partners from the academia  and private sector2. In most countries, there is little support  for educational research, either from the government or the  private sector. Developing capacity to do high-quality and  policy-relevant research would also be beneficial to students. References Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J.A. (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown. Arias, E. & Cristia, J. (2014). The IDB and Technology  in Education: How to Promote Effective Programs?  Interamerican Development Bank No. IDB-TN-670. Washigton  D.C. Report available at https:/ /publications.iadb.org/ handle/11319/6550#sthash.OM08AJpW.dpuf Becker, G. S. (1975). Front matter, human capital: a theoretical  and empirical analysis, with special reference to education.  In  Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with  Special Reference to Education, Second Edition  (pp. 22-0). NBER. Becker, G. S. (1995).  Human capital and poverty alleviation.  World Bank, Human Resources Development and Operations  Policy. Bezem, P. (2012). Equidad en la distribución de la oferta  educativa. Documento de Trabajo  N° 91. Retrieved from:  https:/ /www.cippec.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/2513.pdf Carrasco, R., Pérez, M., & Núñez, D. (2015). Hacia una  2 For more information about MINEDU Lab see http:/ /www.minedu.gob. pe/minedulab/, although information is in Spanish. itself. Governments should commit to push forward a national agenda addressing the most relevant and pertinent practices  for each locality, providing resources and technical advice for  a successful implementation.  Additionally, G20 leaders should encourage governments  to increase the access to information and communication  technologies (ICTs). The use of technology in education is a  popular measure among governments, although research  shows that just providing technology, without considerations to  pedagogical planning, will not deliver higher levels of learning.  Thus, use of technology under a guided and blended model  would seem to be more promising (Arias & Cristia, 2014). Proposal 4: Establish adequate and effective  institutional frameworks in education Current evidence suggests the need to promote national  policies that strengthen public education and collaboration  among schools, instead of privatisation and competition.  Rather than competition, cooperation networks among  schools seem to be a crucial factor behind quality  improvement (Muijs, 2010). Comparative evidence shows  that when these networks exist, schools help each other to  improve (Hill and Matthews, 2010). Together they are able  to discuss a wide array of relevant topics, evaluate each  other in order to identify weaknesses, and most importantly,  they share resources, experiences and strategies leading to  quality improvement. Therefore, G20 leaders should actively  promote a change of the prevailing education paradigm, in  order to foster more collaborative school systems.  Students in many LATAM countries would also benefit from  integrated interventions, that combine programs at school  with others addressing nutrition, health, and the reduction  of poverty. Perhaps the first obstacle to achieve this is the  lack of integrated information systems; thus, we propose to  strengthen these systems.
85 84 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeHanushek, E. A. (1991), “When School Finance ‘Reform’ May  Not Be Good Policy,” Harvard Journal on Legislation, 28  (2) (Summer 1991), pp. 423-56, has a discussion of various  aspects of the common litigation. Heckman, J. (2008), Schools, Skills and Synapses, Economic  Inquiry, 46(3), 289-324. Jacob, R., and Parkinson, J. (2015). “The potential for schoolbased interventions that target executive function to improve  academic achievement: A review.”  Review of Educational  Research  85.4 (2015): 512-552. Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., and Stanne, M. B. (2000). “Cooperative learning methods: A meta-analysis” Kingston, N. and Nash, B. (2011). “Formative assessment:  A meta-analysis and a call for research.”  Educational  measurement: Issues and practice  30.4 (2011): 28-37. Knight, J. (1992). Institutions and Social Conflict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  Murray, S. E., Evans, W. N., and Schwab, R. M. (1998),  “Education Finance Reform and the Distribution of Education  Resources,” American Economic Review, 88 (4) (September  1998), pp. 789-812. North, D.C. (1990). Institutions, institutional change and  economic performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press.  OECD (2016), Education at a glance: Educational finance  indicators, OECD Education Statistics (database) Patrinos, H., & Montenegro, C. E. (2014). Comparable estimates  of returns to schooling around the world. World Bank Policy  Research Working Paper, 7020.distribución más equitativa de las oportunidades educativas:¿  cuál es el impacto de la política de Subvención Preferencial  en el desempeño académico de los alumnos más vulnerables  en Chile?. Pensamiento Educativo, 52(2). Cueto, S., Miranda, A., León,  J. and Vásquez, M. C. (2016).  Education Trajectories: From Early Childhood to Early Adulthood  in Peru. Country Report. University of Oxford: Young Lives. Cunha, F. and J. Heckman (2007), The Technology of Skill  Formation, American Economic Review Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan. “Incentives  work: Getting teachers to come to school.” The American  Economic Review 102, no. 4 (2012): 1241-1278. Garcia, S. & Saavedra, J. E. (2017). Educational Impacts and  Cost-Effectiveness of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs in  Developing Countries: A Meta-Analysis. Review of Educational  Research, 87 (5). Goñi, E., López, H. and Servén, L. (2011). “Fiscal Redistribution  and Income Inequality in Latin America”. World Development,  Vol. 39, No 9, pp. 1558-1569. González, J. (2017). ´Putting Social Rights at Risk: Assessing  the Impact of Education Market Reforms in Chile´. In B.S.  Ndimande   & C. Lubienski (Eds.) Privatization and the  Education of Marginalized Children: Policies, Impacts and  Global lessons. New York: Routledge Gonzalez, J. (2018). ‘The Political Economy of Inequality in  Chile: Institutions and Power’. In Anand, Comim, Fennell and  Weiss (eds), The Oxford Handbook of BRICS and Emerging  Economies. Oxford University Press. Forthcoming 2018. Hanushek, E. A.  (1994), Making Schools Work: Improving  Performance and Controlling Costs, Washington, DC:  Brookings Institution, 1994.
86Psacharopoulos, G. (1994). Returns to investment in education:  A global update. World development, 22(9), 1325-1343. Psacharopoulos, G. (1995). The profitability of investment in  education: concepts and methods. Washington, DC: World  Bank. Rivas, A. (2015). América Latina después de PISA: lecciones  aprendidas de la educación en siete países. Buenos Aires:  CIPPEC, Natura, Instituto Natura.  Rivas, A. & Dborkin, D. (2018). ¿Qué cambió en el financiamiento  educativo en Argentina? Buenos Aires: CIPPEC. SUMMA (2017), Innovation in Education for the 21st Century.  How to accelerate change in Latin America and the Caribbean  to include and develop every child’ potential. SUMMA,  Laboratory of Education Researcch and Innovation for Latin  America and the Caribbean. September 2017. SUMMA (2018), Technical Appendices on Effective Education  Practices, available at http:/ /www.summaedu.org/effective-education-practices-platform/?lang=en UNESCO (2017) Global Education monitoring report 2017/8.  Accountability in education: Meeting our commitments. Paris.  UNESCO.  Available at: http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/ images/0025/002593/259338e.pdf Vegas, E., & Coffin, C. (2015). When education expenditure  matters: An empirical analysis of recent international  data. Comparative Education Review, 59(2), 289-304.The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age Transforming education financing for inclusive,  equitable and quality learning outcomes for the 2030/SDG4 Agenda  Kazuhiro Yoshida (Hiroshima University) Yasushi Hirosato (Sophia University)Shinichiro Tanaka (Japan International Cooperation Agency) * Authors are grateful for the editorial support provided by James H.  Williams, George Washington University.
89 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbstract  Education in developing countries faces the daunting  responsibility of trying to enact realistic policies and  strategies, while keeping to the principles and targets of SDG4  and the demands of Results-Based Financing. The education  agenda demands ambitious and transformative changes  that require significantly more financial resources and many  related efforts to achieve learning outcomes. However, there  is insufficient knowledge on how to achieve these goals, and  we have yet to come up with more effective modalities and  mechanisms for aid. This brief presents pitfalls that await  these countries and partners and proposes possible policy  actions and corresponding measures.  Challenge Education is expected to play fundamental roles in realizing sustainable development under the transformative and  ambitious Agenda 2030. In developing countries, thanks to  massive efforts put into universalizing basic education, we  have seen encouraging progress in expanding the education  system, resulting in higher enrollment rates and better equity  in access to education.  Undeniably, more financial resources are needed to meet  the challenges called for by SDG4. What is critical now is  to transform the manner in which education financing  mechanisms work, while being careful to avoid the following pitfalls. Otherwise, additional resources, even if mobilized  domestically and externally, will not achieve SDG4 and other  SDGs.  Pitfall 1.   Political and popular attention has shifted from access  to the quality of education, above all learning outcomes,  which include knowledge, skills, values, attitudes, as well as  employability; while at the same time ensuring equity and  inclusiveness. Policies are tasked with addressing them all at 
91 90 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeProposal  Policy Action 1a. Ensure realistic and feasible policy  planning  The focus on learning outcomes is quite justified. When more  children complete primary education with unsatisfactory  learning, pressure on different levels of education is intensified.  Children need to be prepared for school through expanded  pre-primary education. Children in primary education must  finish more efficiently. Children need to be equipped with  the knowledge and skills required for life, before leaving  secondary education, which is the end of schooling for the  vast majority of youth in developing countries. Policy issues to make these goals a reality require that remaining  issues be tackled: (reaching unserved groups in the population,  providing essential school inputs, employing more teachers,  for instance) as well as new issues (reorienting the curriculum,  improving teaching and learning conditions with innovative  means, for instance). Equity and inclusion are not merely  issues of access but more pressingly of learning. Obviously,  more financial resources need to be mobilized. Adding to the  demands, the international community reinforces expectations  of the education sector by advocating for the SDGs/SDG4,  which link education with other related sectors. This intensifies the pressure on governments for education  to satisfy multiple expectations simultaneously and to crowd  the reform agenda with new initiatives. These expectations  are transmitted through reform measures, which extend  down to the venues where teaching and learning take  place, further burdening the implementation capacity of the  existing system and its key players. Moreover, the timeframe  envisaged for implementation is often too short.   G20 is in a crucial position to advocate and collaborate in  country to ensure that the education policy framework once by running multiple tracks of major reform in parallel.  This makes it difficult for individual reform measures to take  root and institutionalized, endangering the sustainability of  their effects. Pitfall 2. Present discussions on education financing are  largely preoccupied with expanding the resource base and increasing resources flowing into education, mobilized  by “innovative financing” measures such as taxes, dues,  other obligatory charges, impact bonds, debt swaps, and  crowdfunding. 1 However there is little evidence to show that  more resources lead to inclusive and improved “learning.” Pitfall 3.   In response, the international aid community  has made increasing use of the “Results-Based Financing  (RBF)” mechanism, under which resources are provided  on verification of achievement of pre-determined results.2  Results are measured by indicators so-called “DisbursementLinked Indicators (DLIs).” However, in most cases these  “results” are intermediate ones, and countries are left with  the responsibility of moving from intermediate to final  results. Furthermore, stakeholders in developing countries  lack crucial knowledge on how to reach these final results.  Pitfall 4. The process associated with RBF includes education  planning, analysis of policy issues, factor identification (setting  reform agenda and investment priorities), policy appraisal  and learning assessment. This process is often driven by  the requirements of external development partners, and  thus is likely to depend on methods that are developed and  brought in by them to aid recipient countries. Though useful,  this approach risks the process being unduly influenced  by external partners and their expertise, which tends to  limit participation of local stakeholders and use of their  knowledge. This undermines ownership of the knowledge of  local stakeholders.  1 Burnett and Birmingham (2010) and UNESCO Bangkok (2015) 2 World Bank (2017)
93 92 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeG20 leaders should collaborate with other partners in  mainstreaming measures to respect the ownership and  institutionalization of such critical steps in the education  reform process.  Policy Action 2a. Use reform measures that fit their  purposes  The experts that have estimated the costs of achieving SDG44  call for an exponentially more investment in education. The  debate goes beyond increasing domestic financing (expanding  the tax base) or official development assistance, and proposes  establishment of a new financial mechanism for education  (such as the International Financing Facility for Education:  IFFEd5) or using other innovative modes of finance.  Over the past few decades, we have seen the ProgramBased Approach (PBA) (which uses budget support)  gaining momentum due to its advantages in ownership,  harmonization and alignment, which are advocated to  enhance the effectiveness of aid6. Evaluations show, however,  that while this modality has been instrumental in reducing the number of out-of-school children and gender disparities,  it has yet to prove its effectiveness in improving learning  achievement. 7 Meantime, reviews of projects in the education  sector that use conditional cash transfers, another new modality, have shown improved enrollment and attendance,  but no positive effects on student learning, or even whether  they reach the target population. 8 PBA or commonly used  aid modalities are not necessarily a panacea for redressing the current learning crisis. 4 EFA Global Monitoring Report team (2015), Education Commission (2016) 5 Education Commission (2017) 6 Riddell and Niño-Zarazúa (2016) 7 Independent Commission for Aid Impact (2012) and De Kemp, Faust, and  Leiderer (2012) 8 Reimers, DeShano da Silva, and Trevino (2006) and Bauchet, Undurraga, Reyes-Garcia, Behrman, and Dodoy (2018)accompanying this broad reform agenda is realistic and  feasible, particularly from the viewpoint of actors who  implement policy. Critical implementation issues include the  overall volume of work, timeframe, sequencing, and budget. A proposed strategy and means for implementation are  presented in a subsequent section, as they are related to  several policy actions (see Figure 1 below). Policy Action 1b. Build ownership, and  institutionalize new ways to ensure sustainability  Successful implementation of such a complicated education  reform agenda requires that it be based on and nurturing a  sense of ownership among stakeholders, essentially those who  implement it at the field-level. Reforms which add new tasks,  involves different ways of thinking and actions, have to build on  shared views and vision for change from the very beginning of  the reform process. This requires bi-directional communication  between the central policy makers and the rest of the system.  In addition, the education reform needs to maintain positive  and consistent results for the benefits to be realized. For the  sustainability of the reform results, each step of the reform  process has to be internalized and institutionalized3. It is  desirable that issues are identified and solutions come from within, to maintain motivation and ownership of the process.  Where ideas of the reform and its measures are introduced  from the top, or by the pressures from external sources, as  is often the case with education in developing countries,  we have to be even more sensitive to make sure the reform  process is not derailed.  These essentials are well-known for successful reform, but  are too frequently overlooked, as education reform works to  tackle complicated issues comprehensively.   3 Gillies (2010) and Verger (2014)
95 94 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agemost cases intermediate ones.10 Moreover, there are no clearcut solutions to achieving learning outcomes. This means  that neither aid recipient countries nor the international  community which support them have ready answers. To  face this challenge, the international community emphasizes  learning assessments (PISA, TIMSS, SACMEQ, EGRA, or  national assessment, for instance) as one approach, hoping  they will help verify the effectiveness of policy measures  or identify enabling factors, or other systemic factors  that show promise for improving learning.11 We have to  remember, however, that a conventional input-output model  of education production function has been criticized for not  presenting a systematic relationship to learning outcomes.12 This points to the need to go beyond identifying enabling factors even if they may provide useful hints for targeting  investment (“what” to invest in) and combine them  with knowledge on the practical process and methods  of improving learning (“how” to achieve results). As an  illustration, one approach would be to combine knowledge  on what key competencies are required in the 21 st century  with knowledge on how to equip learners with those competencies and what conditions are required for learners  to use them as required. G20 should call upon the international community at large  to recognize that such knowledge on pathways to move  from intermediate to final results exist globally and locally,  and to lead the work of pooling the knowledge for ready  reference, to be adjusted to meet local conditions and  to be shared among stakeholders through collaboration  among the various players.  10 Yoshidak and Van der Walt (2017) 11 See, for instance, SABER that The World Bank is leading. http:/ /saber. worldbank.org/index.cfm  12 Hanushek (2008)G20 is expected to stress that increases in financial resources should go hand in hand with an evidence-based and  informed choice of reform measures that fit their purposes,  with room for adjustments to meet local contexts. Policy Action 2b. Use resources efficiently by  ensuring conditions for success  In addition to meeting the pressing needs for financial and  other resources to education, it is equally important to  pursue wiser ways for using those resources, as well as to  develop capacity of the education system to deliver quality  services. We experienced “aid fatigue” during 1980s and  1990s that reduced the amount of aid due to lack of visible  and lasting aid results. We have to avoid following the  same path. Efficiency in the use of available resources is  vital and requires good understanding of conditions for  success. Limited resources must be used in such a way to  maximize their effects.9 No simple solution has been found  for improving learning outcomes, which makes it all the more important to accumulate practical knowledge on what works  and how to realize improvements in learning. G20 should emphasize the importance that due regard be  given to the contexts and conditions under which measures  have been implemented successfully elsewhere and to  adapting them to current cases.  Policy Action 3a. Pool and share knowledge on  pathways from intermediate to final results Influential trends in favor of RBF risk shifting the responsibility  for the remaining and most difficult push to achieve the  final results. This is because the agreed “results” that trigger  release of external resources to recipient governments are in  9 Fredriksen (2010)
97 96 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageassessment-- all of which benefit countries greatly. These  methods are mostly crafted outside developing countries,  often introduced by international partners who are influenced  by certain theories close to them. This can cause the process  to be guided by, and to depend on the support by external  experts who tend to own most of the knowledge used in the  reform process, and who fail to take advantage of valuable  opportunities for wider participation, to build the capacity  and to ensure ownership of stakeholders. For instance, education sector planning is guided by  parameters (“benchmarks”) which are obtained from cases  of countries that have successfully achieved common  educational goals.14 Education sector analysis that justifies  international financial support, and that provides a basis  for reform agenda setting and clues for solutions is often  influenced by external partners. A similar approach is taken  to identifying successful models for producing results, as well  as for costing the goal framework. However, such approaches  may fail to capture other positive or negative consequences  of the educational reform agenda, or to respond to the multifaceted realities behind the issues. As the educational issues we are tackling become increasingly  complex and, therefore, require wider participation of  enlarged groups of stakeholders, it is imperative to bring in  perspectives beyond conventional analyses.  G20 should gather its voices to highlight the idea that there  is great room for using valuable local knowledge and  multiple perspectives for analysis, planning and solution of  educational problems. Such knowledge and perspectives,  used through an inclusive process, will enable us all to  understand the complex realities of issues and the entire  process of educational development. 14 UNESCO-IIEP Pôle de Dakar, World Bank, UNICEF and Global Partnership for Education (2014)Policy Action 3b. Develop more useful “outcome”  indicators  Correspondingly, G20 should emphasize in its practice of  international education cooperation that developing more  useful “outcome” indicators is an urgent task.  Take for instance, “the number of teachers who received  new in-service training,” used in a real case as one outcome  indicator.13 This assumes that the new in-service training  satisfactorily incorporates orientation to the curriculum. It further assumes that those teachers who received the  training apply better teaching methods in their respective  and more difficult teaching and learning conditions. Inputoutput actions (curriculum revised, teachers trained) need  to be consistently translated along with their embedded  concepts (such as student-centered, problem-solving, selfefficacy, etc.) into process actions (teaching and learning  practices). Capturing such a complex series of changes  in a single “outcome” indicator is an unrealistic challenge,  although outcome indicators, once adopted, certainly attract  the attention of policy makers sometimes excessively and  may thereby unintentionally undermine concerted efforts.  Useful “outcome” indicators for RBF need to be developed  and used with other measures so that together they are  placed in implementation plans that clearly elucidate actions  and considerations to be undertaken concurrently and  consistently. Policy Action 4. Understand the complex reality of  the education sector from multiple perspectives Useful methods have been developed for education  planning—analysis of policy issues, identification of solution  factors (investment priority), policy appraisal and learning  13 GPE (2015)
99 98 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agestudy. After jointly discussing classroom challenges, the  class is opened to all colleagues and some teachers of other  schools. They observe the lesson focusing on learners, and  later have reflective discussions to improve teaching and  learning. The principal leads this school-wide practice.  University researchers who are teacher educators continuously  visit schools and provide on-site advisory services.  District and provincial education offices have encouraged  more schools to practice lesson study, and, seeing its costeffectiveness and gains in learning, have expanded it to  other districts.  The initiative began with assistance from JICA, and has  continued with the commitment of local stakeholders.  The roles of players are clear, mutually stimulating, and  objectives are shared. They are centered on collaboration  between schools and university, with support of the  Ministry of National Education at different levels.  What was a small community of practice is now solid and  has evolved from the practice in Java with participation  of three education universities to the nation as a whole.  Eventually a Lesson Study Association of Indonesia was  established (2012), which has become a core member of  the World Association of Lesson Studies. SI3. Reform measures should be employed based on  evidence through which their effectiveness is validated. The informed choice of policy measures is made possible  when reliable evidence-based information is available on  what works for which challenge. Policy borrowing is common  on a global scale, and the measures adopted in one country  with positive results tend to be employed in other countries.  This in turn requires that a systematic evaluation of the  intervention has to be embedded in the reform plan of the  country concerned.Strategy for Implementation  The implementation strategies suggested below do not  necessarily correspond to individual challenges and policy  actions, but rather need to be considered together as they  are closely related to each other, as illustrated by Figure 1. The G20 should encourage the global community as well as  developing country partners to take these strategic actions  collaboratively, recognizing their interdependence: SI1. Realistic and feasible policy planning should carefully  consider what additional roles will be created, who will  take them on, and who will be asked to accommodate  difficult behavioral changes. Policy planning should avoid  giving excessive burdens, especially to those who are  directly involved with teaching and learning. Invariably,  implementation boils down to teachers. Adequate  consideration should be given to the sequencing of events. SI2. It is of paramount importance that stakeholders be  identified; that they reach a common understanding of  the reform objectives and processes; that their roles  be clarified; and they develop the capacity and receive necessary support for implementation (see Box 1). Box 1. Institutionalization Matters: The case of  Lesson Study in Indonesia15 Institutionalized reform actions can help bring intermediate  outputs to sustained final results, namely, improved  teaching and learning in a sustainable manner.  Indonesia has successfully fostered the school-based  practice of in-service teacher development called lesson  15  UNESCO-IIEP Pôle de Dakar, World Bank, UNICEF and Global Partnership for Education (2014)
101 100 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeSI4. Ensuring participation of all stakeholders, primarily  field-level practitioners, is indispensable in identifying  education policy issues, prioritizing and planning the  actions. This will help understanding of complicated realities  and conditions for success, and thus make educational plans  more realistic and feasible. SI5. The more complicated and difficult educational  challenges are, the more crucial it is that wider groups of  stakeholders (including civil society representatives, media  and researchers) participate in and contribute to the full  cycle of the reform process, with a sense of ownership.  This requires building on local and field-level knowledge  of policy processes for analyzing issues, gaining insight  into and adopting solutions, sequencing events, monitoring  and evaluation. Such an approach will help maximize  opportunities for building the capacity of stakeholders, and  will be instrumental in building a collaborative community  of practice. For instance, knowing that a weakness in current  practice lies in the monitoring of practices in the field, notably  teaching and learning practices that are difficult for indicators  to capture suggests that participation of community and NGOs in monitoring teaching and learning might be a good  strategy to consider. Figure1. Transforming Education Financing – Challenges and  Proposed Solutions Status and Challenges Proposals for Solution Behavioral  change Behavioral  change Behavioral  change Behavioral  changeOwnership OwnershipPolicy Actions Strategy for Implementation 1. Inclusive & equitable  learning outcomes with  employability demands   challenging multiple reform  tracks1a. Plan realistic and feasible:  timeframe, sequence and  capacitySI1. Avoid giving excessive burdens to implementers on  the ground SI3. Employ reform measures  based on evidence; and evaluate effectivenessSI2. Gain common  understanding among  stakeholders, clarify roles,   and develop capacity  SI 4. Ensure participation of field-level practitioners in: issues  identification, prioritization and  action-planning SI5. Use global/local knowledge  for policy making & planning;   build capacity for analysis & identifying solutions; and build  collaborative community of practice1b. Institutionalize reform measures for sustainability 2a. Use reform measures that  fit their purposes 3b. Develop more useful  “outcome” indicators2b. Use resources efficiently  by ensuring conditions for  success 3a. Pool and share knowledge on  pathways from intermediate to final results 4. Understand complex reality of  education sector from multiple perspectives2. More resources   =worked for better access    ≠ inclusive learning 3. Results-Based Financing  shifts more responsibility to  countries; it uses ‘outcomes’ that are intermediate, without  showing how to reach final  results 4. External knowledge driven,  local knowledge not used in:  planning, analysis, adoption of  solutionOwnership
103 102 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeMay 14, 2018 at: http:/ /home.hiroshima-u.ac.jp/cice/wpcontent/uploads/2014/03/13-2-2.pdf  Gillies, J. (2010) The Power of Persistence: Education System  Reform and Aid Effectiveness – Case Studies in Long-Term  Education Reform. EQUIP2/USAID. Accessed May 14, 2018  at: https:/ /www.epdc.org/sites/default/files/documents/ Power%20of%20Persistence.pdf  Global Partnership for Education (2015) Education Sector  Program Implementation Grant Allocations: Report from the  Country Grants and Performance Committee. Hanushek, E.A. (2008) “Education Production Functions”  in Durlauf, S.N. and L.E. Blume (eds.) The New Palgrave  Dictionary of Economics, Second Edition. Accessed May 14,  2018 at: http:/ /hanushek.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ publications/Hanushek%202008%20Palgrave%20--%20 EducProdFunct.pdf  Hendayana, S. (2015) “Teacher Learning through Lesson  Study in Indonesia” in Wood K. and S. Sithamparam (eds.) Realizing Learning: Teachers’ Professional Development  through Lesson and Learning Study. Abingdon: Routledge. Independent Commission for Aid Impact (2012) DFID’s  Education Programmes in Three East African Countries.  London: ICAI. Mizuno, K. (2017) “Lesson Study in Indonesia: Enhancing  Quality of Learning,” World Associations of Lesson Studies  (WALS) International Conference 2017. Accessed May 14,  2018 at: https:/ /www.jica.go.jp/information/seminar/2017/ ku57pq0000250gbz-att/ 20171124_01_02.pdf  Reimers, F., DeShano da Silva, C., and Trevino, E. (2006)   Where is the “Education” in Conditional Cash Transfer in  Education? Montreal: UIS. Accessed May 14, 2018 at: http:/ /  uis.unesco.org/sites/default/files/documents/where-is-References  Bauchet, J., E.A. Undurraga, V. Reyes-García, J.R. Behrman, and R.A. Godoy. (2018) “Conditional Cash Transfers for  Primary Education: Which Children are Left Out?” World  Development 105:1-12.  Burnett, N., and D. Bermingham. (2010) Innovative Financing  for Education. ESP Working Paper Series No. 5 (The Open  Society Institute’s Education Support Program) Birger, F. (2010) “Enhancing the Allocative Efficiency of  Education Aid: A Review of Issues and Option.” Journal of  International Cooperation in Education. 13/2:11-29. De Kemp, A., J. Faust, and S. Leiderer. (2012) Synthesis Report:  Between High Expectations and Reality: An Evaluation of  Budget Support in Zambia. Accessed May 14, 2018 at: https:/ / www.oecd.org/derec/sweden/zambia.pdf Education Commission (2017) A Proposal to Create the  International Financing Facility for Education. Accessed May  14, 2018 at: http:/ /educationcommission.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/03/IFFEd-Overview-4-17.pdf  Education Commission (2016) The Learning Generation.  Accessed May 14, 2018 at:  http:/ /report.educationcommission. org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Learning_ Generation_ Full_Report.pdf  Education for All Global Monitoring Report Team (2015)  Pricing the Right to Education: The Cost of Reaching New  Targets by 2030. Policy Paper 18. Accessed May 14, 2018 at:  http:/ /unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002321/232197E. pdf  Fredriksen, B. (2010) “Enhancing the Allocative Efficiency of  Education Aid: A Review of Issues and Options.” Journal of  International Cooperation in Education, 13/2:11-29. Accessed 
104the-education-in-conditional-cash-transfers-in-education06-en_0.pdf   Riddell, A. and Niño-Zarazúa, M. (2016) “The Effectiveness  of Foreign Aid to Education – What Can Be Learned?”  International Journal of Educational Development. 48:23-36. Saito, E., I. Harun, I. Kuboki and H. Tachibana (2006)  “Indonesian Lesson Study in Practice: Case Study of  Indonesian Mathematics and Science Teacher Education  Project.” Journal of In-service Education, 32/2: 171–184 UNESCO Bangkok (2015) Innovative Financing for Out-ofSchool Children and Youth. Bangkok: UNESCO Bangkok UNESCO-IIEP Pôle de Dakar, World Bank, UNICEF and Global  Partnership for Education (2014) Education Sector AnalysisMethodological Guidelines. Accessed May 14, 2018 at: http:/ /  unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002305/230532e.pdf  Verger, A. (2014) “Why do Policy-makers Adopt Global  Education Policies? Toward a Research Framework on the Varying Role of Ideas in Education Reform.“ Current Issues in  Comparative Education 16 (2), 14-29. World Bank (2017) Results-based Financing in Education -  Financing Results to Strengthen Systems. Washington DC:  World Bank. World Bank (2018) World Development Report 2018: Learning  – to Realize Education’s Promise. Washington DC: World  Bank. Accessed May 14, 2018 at: http:/ /hdl.handle.net/10986/  28340 (Not yet used in text) Yoshida, K. and Van der Walt, J.L. (2017) “The PolicyImplementation-Results linkage for Education Development  and Aid Effectiveness in the Education 2030 Era.” Compare: A  Journal of Comparative and International Education, 48:1, 39-55. The Future of Work and Education  for the Digital Age Issues and options for financing  post-compulsory education Mick Fletcher (RCU Ltd) Paul Grainger (UCL Institute of Education)
107 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbstract  The aim of this paper is to assist trans-national discussions of  financing TVET by highlighting a range of alternative options  and providing a framework for evaluating their relevance  in specific circumstances. TVET is in a financially vulnerable  position in a number of administrations, falling between schools  and universities, and subject to changing policy whims. The paper draws on experience of the impact of different  approaches in practice.  The evidence is drawn primarily from  the UK. It is thus illustrative rather than definitive, though a  high degree of what some have termed ‘policy churn’ makes  England a useful source of examples.   The Challenge The policy objectives considered the most important for funding TVET are: 1. Increasing efficiency. In simple terms increasing the  efficiency of post-compulsory education can mean  seeking to do more for the same amount of funding or  achieve the same output for less. Potential mechanisms  include approaches designed to increase competition  between institutions or changing the basis on which  funds are allocated to reflect outputs rather than input  costs.  Increasing efficiency may or may not be in tension  with other objectives such as promoting growth or equity  depending on the mechanisms used which in turn are  influence by other aspects of context (i.e. is there a need  to cut expenditure overall) 2. Improving sustainability. This refers to the desirability  of safeguarding post-compulsory education from either  significant fluctuations in funding or substantial long  term decline.  In recent years in the UK this has generally  been taken to mean increasing (or at least stabilising) 
109 108 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agefunding support and attaching specific conditions to  general funding allocations.  Routing public funding  via employers has been seen as a way of ensuring that  training providers focus on employers’ needs rather than  their own preferences. Criteria This section outlines six key criteria against which the  suitability of any financing mechanism might be judged.   Limiting the length of the list to any specific number is to  some extent arbitrary as it is always possible to argue for  splitting one of the criteria into two or more.  The primary  principles applied in determining the list however have been  completeness – that all important considerations might be  included under one or another of the criteria; distinctiveness –  that it is possible for a mechanism to be judged as performing  well on one criterion but not on another; and manageability  – the list needs to be short enough to be applied in practice.    This is not to say users should consider it ‘cast in stone’: any  discussions around this topic should include consideration  of whether potentially important issues are excluded or  obscured, or indeed whether two or more criteria might be  combined without serious loss. The key criteria are: 1. Efficiency. This refers to the operational efficiency of the mechanism itself, not the efficiency of the education  system to which it relates, which is a different, though  equally relevant, question.  It is important that the financing  mechanism itself does not require a disproportionate  share of the available resources for its own operation.  An  extreme, though not unknown, example of an inefficient  mechanism might be the requirement for institutions  frequently to submit detailed bids for relatively small  sums of money. private investment from individuals and employers,  though a shift from grant to loan funding for a large part  of post-compulsory education also has the benefit of  stabilising government expenditure on the sector.   The  apprenticeship levy (a hypothecated payroll tax on large  employers) plays a similar role. 3. Promoting equity. Increasing access to post-compulsory  education by disadvantaged or under-represented groups is a frequent policy objective and at times a  dominant one. Measures to improve equity can include  differential funding rates for types of programme or  student; the application of grants or bursaries for some  categories of student and restrictions on the eligibility  of some activities for support (e.g. only funding the first  qualification at a given level) Making loan repayments  contingent on income has a similar objective. 4. Generating growth. In many jurisdictions increasing the  numbers of participants in adult learning at all levels  has been a key objective.  Approaches designed to  promote growth include some versions of competitive  funding models, simply removing caps on growth or the  introduction of levy schemes of various sorts.  Policy  makers have also sought to encourage growth by reducing  costs to participants, whether by removing up-front costs  (loans) reducing fees (changed course design / delivery)  or helping meet direct &  indirect costs (bursaries) One  role of individual learning accounts has been to influence  individual demand for learning. 5. Shaping Priorities. Governments are often as interested in influencing the mix of post-compulsory education  provision as in its overall size.  Of recurring interest is  the objective of aligning the outcomes of education  with the presumed needs of the labour market.   Mechanisms adopted to this end include changing the  rates of funding given to providers for specific subjects,  restricting the eligibility of certain programmes for public 
111 110 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agewith flexibility since in most changing contexts there will be  winners and losers. 6. Saliency. In some ways the most important criterion  for judging the efficacy of a funding mechanism is the  extent to which it is aligned with the overall goals of the  education system and delivers outcomes supporting  those goals. Since the goals of those responsible for  education systems differ the suitability of any specific  mechanism will, in important respects, be governed by  context.  To put it at its most simple, if the overriding policy  objective is to reduce unit costs a different approach will  be required from a context where growth in, or widening  of participation is key.  Because of the importance of  context the next section offers a simplified analysis of  possible policy priorities. Policy objectives. As noted in earlier sections the suitability  of a mechanism will in part be determined by the purposes of  the education system it serves.  The mechanisms examined  in this paper are seen as representative of  aspects of policy  that might be prioritised at different times or in different jurisdictions.  It is important to emphasise that although  they are presented as ideal types it is highly unlikely that  one policy thrust would ever rationally be pursued to the  exclusion of all others; it is hard to conceive for example that  any government would completely ignore the efficiency of  the system or equally, have no interest other than reducing  its unit cost. Financing mechanisms are not the only lever available  to governments seeking to influence the behaviour of  institutions. Arrangements for governance, inspection or  performance management can have an equal or in some  cases more powerful effect and may be the more appropriate  policy choice.  The role of these other levers is not considered  further here but a good overview of experience in England  1994-2014 can be found in ‘Coming of Age for FE’ . 2. Transparency. This criterion refers to the extent to which  relevant stakeholders in the education system – institutions,  users and public authorities – are aware of how the  mechanism operates and know what is going on.  As used  here this term also relates to accountability and objectivity;  governments can only properly be held to account if  their dealings are visible, based on an overt rationale and  available for scrutiny. Similarly the term is used here to  include aspects of ‘robustness’ i.e. the capacity to gain  advantage by ‘gaming the system’ is minimised.  3. Predictability. Predictability is closely allied with  transparency but is not the same thing. A mechanism  based on rolling forward the sums allocated in previous  years might be highly predictable but offer no basis for  accountability.  Predictability is important in facilitating  institutional planning and allowing stakeholders to align  their actions; it reduces the need to hold unproductive  contingency reserves. Predictability might be more  important at some times than others. 4. Flexibility. Since the world is constantly evolving an effective mechanism must be able to cope with  changing circumstances, and also allow institutions to be  adaptable themselves. The salience of this criterion will  differ with the context – in a rapidly developing nation,  or a sector experiencing discontinuous change it will  be more important than in more settled circumstances.   There are perhaps some tensions between flexibility and  predictability or transparency such that in practice it will  not be possible to optimise all three. 5. Acceptability. It is important that any financing mechanism  is ‘felt fair’ by key stakeholders in order to minimise the  likelihood of action to subvert or circumvent it.  As stakeholder  interests are not identical this requires a complex balancing  act.  Other than in the most complacent of circumstances  transparency is probably a necessary but not sufficient  condition for acceptability. There is probably some tension 
113 112 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Age• Output based funding – effective but moral hazard/ quality?  Sustainability • HE loans – secured funding & maintained demand & equity though not ‘felt fair’  • ILAs – high take up but probably deadweight; some fraud  • FE loans – big shortfall in take up  • Co-funding – poor collection in TVET • Involvement of  financial institutions   Equity • Income contingency – no hit to widening Participation in HE but not felt  • Tighter eligibility rules – refocussed  system  • Education Maintenance Allowance – small but well  evidenced +ve impact  • Levy – seems to be shift to higher level & loss of L2 /  16-18Widening Participation uplift – felt to work but weak  evidence  Growth • Competitive funding models – rapid growth; some  questionable; Levy – slow take up; signs of deadweight  • Train to Gain – quality & deadweight issues It is also relevant to note here that the distinctive nature  of financing mechanisms for post-compulsory education  derive mainly from its specific context.     The six criteria  outlined in the previous section could equally well be applied  to schools in the compulsory phase of education.   In the  post-compulsory sector financing mechanisms have also to  reflect the fact that participation is voluntary for example or  that learners are also voters.  It is probably the case that the  content of post-compulsory education, as defined for this  paper, is more varied than either the compulsory phase or  indeed initial higher education. Proposal: Financing mechanisms and policy  objectives This section summarises the evaluations of sixteen separate  mechanisms according to the six criteria outlined. It suggests  that this framework be adopted by policy makers to evaluate  any proposed system for the funding of TVET, looking both  at their operation as mechanisms – how efficient, transparent  etc. they appear to have been, and their impact on their  presumed objective or objectives.  The two grids represent  a subjective assessment of how well they appear to have  performed against the criteria set out and should be taken  more as an invitation to extend and deepen the analysis than  as the last word on the subject. Efficiency • Competitive funding models    drove substantial growth  in 1990s   • Price competition – appears to work neither in HE or TVET • Allowing new entrants -  no clear evidence as yet (but  franchising may expand) 
115 114 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeLoans (FE  & appren-tices)low Learning Accountslow Co-Fun-ding rulesmed low med Financial institu-tionslow Tigh-tening eligibility rulesmed high Appren-ticeship levyhigh low med Train to Gain pro-grammelow med high Removing  cap on  numbersmed high Adjusting  funding rateslow Bursaries & EMAmed high W P fun-ding upliftmed med• Removing HE cap - positive impact England (& Australia) Prioritising • Demand-led focuses on demand from students, not  ‘needs of the economy’ • Levy - Employers still leaning on providers; priorities not  the same as government’s • Level 2 entitlement etc; started to reshape FE • Adjusting rates – doesn’t impact seriously on demand side  Impact of selected financing mechanisms on policy  objectives Efficiency SustainabilityEquity Growth Prioriti-sing Competi-tive fun-dinghigh high Price competi-tionlow low Out-put-rela-ted fun-dingmed Encoura-ging new providerslow med Income contin-gent Lo-ans (HE)high
117 116 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeRemoving  cap on numbershigh high med high high Adjusting funding rateshigh high low med med Bursaries & EMAlow med low low med W P fun-ding upliftmed med med med highAnalysis of selected financing mechanisms  Operati-onal Effi-ciencyTranspa-rencyPredicta-bilityFlexibility Accepta-bility Competi-tive fun-dinghigh high med med med Price competi-tionhigh med low high low Out-put-rela-ted fun-dingmed high med high med Encoura-ging new providerslow med low med med Income contingent Loans (HE)low high med med med Loans (FE  & appren-tices)low high low med low Learning Accountslow high low med med Co-Funding rulesmed high low med med Financial  institu-tionslow low low med med Tigh-tening eligibility rulesmed med med high med Appren-ticeship levylow med low med med Train to Gain pro-grammemed med low low med
119 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeAbout the authors Alejandra Cardini Alejandra Cardini is Director of the Education Programme  at the Centre for the Implementation of Public Policies for  Equity and Growth (CIPPEC) in Argentina. She also works  as an educational policy professor at the University of San  Andrés and at the School of Politics and Government of  Austral University. She worked for many years as a researcher  and as Minister advisor for Argentina’s National Ministry of  Education. Cardini is a sociologist and she holds a PhD in  Education from University of San Andres (Argentina) and  an Educational Policies MA from the Institute of Education,  United Kingdom. Alessia Zucchetti Alessia Zucchetti is the Research Coordinator of the Center  for Research - Ceibal Foundation in Uruguay. Her field of  expertise is focused in ICT, Internet-related policies and ICT  innovation.  Before joining Ceibal Foundation, she served at  the Directorate General Connect of the European Commission  (Brussels, Belgium) with the Principal Adviser and in the unit  of ICT innovation. Previously, she worked as a specialist in  EU policies at the Europe Direct Center of Forlì (part of the  information and communication network of the European  Commission in Italy). Alessia Zucchetti holds a Bachelor’s  Degree in International Relations from the Faculty of Law,  Universidad de la República, Uruguay, and a Master’s Degree  in Mass Media and Politics from the University of Bologna, Italy. Allan Michel Jales Coutinho Allan Michel Jales Coutinho is Knowledge Production  Coordinator at the Center for Excellence and Innovation in 
121 120 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital AgeEducational Policies of Getulio Vargas Foundation. He also  serves as a consultant to several educational organizations  such as Project Access. Previously, he worked as an  English teacher and Assistant to the Principal in Japanese  and American schools, respectively. He earned his BA in  International Development and Education from Green  Mountain College, USA, and Nagoya University, Japan. He  holds a Master’s Degree in International Education Policy  from Harvard University. Axel Rivas Axel Rivas is Director of the School of Education of San Andres  University (Buenos Aires, Argentina). He is also a fellow  researcher at the Centre for the Implementation of Public  Policies for Equity and Growth (CIPPEC). He has conducted  many national and international research projects in education  policy and he has published more than twelve books in this  field. He holds an MA in Social Sciences and Education (Latin  American Faculty of Social Sciences) and a PhD in Social  Sciences (Buenos Aires University). He has also studied at the  Institute of Education (University College London). Bárbara Flores Bárbara Flores is Director of Education Policy Research of SUMMA. She has been consultant to IADB, J-PAL, Institute  for Fiscal Studies, and University College London in England.  She worked at the Ministry of Education, Government of  Chile, and at the Microdata Center at Universidad de Chile.  She has developed teaching experience at Universidad de  Chile, Universidad Técnico Santa María, Universidad Católica  Silva Henríquez and University College London. She received  a B.A. degree in Economic Sciences and a M.Sc. degree in  Economics from the University of Chile, and a M.Res. degree  in Economics and a PhD in Economics from the University  College London.Claudia Costin Claudia Costin is Director of CEIPE FGV - Center for Excellence and Innovation of Education Policies. She is a visiting  professor at the Harvard Graduate School of Education and  a member of the Global Commission for The Future of Work  at ILO – International Labor Organization. She was in the  recent past Senior Director for Global Education in the World  Bank, Secretary of Education of Rio de Janeiro and Federal  Minister for Public Administration and State Reform. She has  a Master’s Degree in Economics from the School of Business  Administration of São Paulo at Getulio Vargas Foundation  and a PhD level in Administration at the same school. Cristobal Cobo Romaní Cristóbal Cobo Romaní is Director of the Center for Research  – Ceibal Foundation in Uruguay. Associate researcher at  the Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, UK. He  has served as external Evaluator for the Inter-American  Development Bank; the National Science Foundation  and MIT Press (US), and the International Development  Research Centre, Canada. He was Professor and director  of Communication and New Technologies at the Latin  American Faculty of Social Sciences, Mexico.PhD and MA  in Communication Sciences at Universitat Autònoma de  Barcelona, Spain. Javier González Javier González is Director of SUMMA, Affiliated Lecturer  at University of Cambridge, and Advisory Board Member  of UNESCO´s Global Education Monitoring Report  (GEM). He has been a senior consultant to UNESCO, the  World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank;  Cabinet Advisor on education and innovation policies  at the Ministry of Finance of Chile; Executive Secretary 
123 122 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Ageof the Chilean Ministers Council for Advanced Human  Capital Formation; Director of Research at CONICYT; and  Researcher at the Ministry of Education. He holds a BA  and MA in Economics (Universidad Católica de Chile), and  a MPhil and PhD in Development Studies (University of  Cambridge). Kazuhiro Yoshida Kazuhiro Yoshida is professor and director at Center for the Study of International Cooperation in Education, Hiroshima  University, Japan. His main research interest is in the education  aid effectiveness. He has served as an Asia-Pacific regional  member of SDG-Education 2030 Steering Committee and  its co-vice chair. He has worked extensively on education  issues of developing countries, including at Japan Bank  for International Cooperation (current JICA) as director of  social development division and at the World Bank as human  resources economist/operations officer. He holds a MPhil in  development studies from University of Sussex. Mathias Urban Mathias Urban is Desmond Chair of Early Childhood  Education, and Director of the International Centre for Early  Childhood Research at Dublin City University, Ireland (DCU).  He works and publishes widely on questions of diversity  and equality, social justice, evaluation and professionalism  in working with young children, families and communities in  diverse socio-cultural contexts. Before joining DCU Mathias  held the position of Froebel Professor of Early Childhood  Studies at the University of Roehampton, London.Mathias is  Chair of DECET (Diversity in Early Childhood Education and  Training) and President of the International Froebel Society  (IFS). Urban holds a PhD from Goethe University, Frankfurt  am Main, Germany.Mick Fletcher  Mick Fletcher is an educational consultant and a director  of RCU Ltd, a market research company specialising in the  analysis of data concerning vocational education and training.   He is also a senior research associate at the UCL Institute of  Education. Having studied social sciences at the Universities of  East Anglia and Essex Mick trained as a teacher in vocational  colleges before joining the national management development  centre for further education where he specialised in the funding  and financing arrangements for VET.  He has contributed  to courses and conferences across the UK and international  events sponsored by CEDEFOP and OECD. Paul Grainger Paul Grainger is Co-director of the Centre for Education  and Work, and Head of Innovation and Enterprise for the  Department of Education, Practice and Society at University  College London. Previously he was Principal of a Further  Education College in Liverpool and has worked in TVET for  most of his career. His present research concerns systems  leadership, the complexities of regional training, skills and  employment patterns, the potential impact of the 4th  industrial revolution and transitions from education to work.  Paul was originally a Historian and holds an MPhil from the  University of East Anglia.  Rita Flórez-Romero Rita Flórez-Romero is a professor in the Department of  Human Communication of the Faculty of Medicine of the  National University of Colombia.  She directs the Cognition  and Language in Childhood research group and coordinates  the “Communication and Early Education” research line of the  Master’s Degree in Education of the Institute of Research in  Education of the Faculty of Human Sciences. The purpose of 
125 124 The Future of Work  and Education  for the Digital Agemany of his investigations has been to offer recommendations  to the public policy of both the district (Bogotá D.C.) and  national (Colombia). For more than twenty years he has  cooperated with teachers and educational agents of all  educational levels. Santiago Cueto Santiago Cueto is the Executive Director of GRADE,  a research center in Lima. He is also a member of the  National Council of Education and Professor at the  Pontificia Universidad Catolica (PUCP) in Peru, and Country  Director for the Young Lives longitudinal study (http:/ / younglives.org.uk). His research focuses on analyzing  inequalities in educational opportunities associated with  poverty, ethnicity, disability and other circumstances, and  developing policies and programs to reduce the gaps  associated with the above. Santiago holds a License in  Educational Psychology from PUCP and a Ph. D. in the  same field from Indiana University. Shinichiro Tanaka Shinichiro Tanaka is a Senior Education Advisor to Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and prior to joining  JICA, he worked at PADECO, a consulting firm based in  Tokyo, and the World Bank. He is an education consultant in  the areas of administration and finance, school development,  and community governance, and has provided consultancy/ advisories to the schools, offices, ministries of education,  and private firms over 30 developing countries. Tanaka holds  an Educational MA with distinction from the Institute of  Education, University of London.Yasushi Hirosato Yasushi Hirosato is Professor, Faculty of Global Studies, Sophia University, Tokyo, Japan, and Director, Sophia ASEAN  Hub Center in Bangkok, Thailand. He is a former Professor,  Graduate School of International Development, Nagoya  University in Japan, and a former Principal Education  Specialist at the Asian Development Bank in the Philippines.  He also worked at the World Bank, and served as an Expert to  the Japan International Cooperation Agency and as a Senior  Advisor to the Japan Bank for International Cooperation. He  holds a PhD in Education and Development from University  of Pittsburgh and a MA in International Affairs from Sophia  University.


