#DigitalUNDP1 DIGITAL STRATEGY 2022 — 2025UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
#DigitalUNDP2 Foreword  3 Executive summary 5 Introduction 6 Digital Strategy 2019-2021  8 Part 1 – Guiding principles and value proposition 10  Guiding principles Value proposition  Part 2 – Setting the course  16 Vision and objectives Pathway 1 – Programmatic objectives  Pathway 1 – Programmatic outcomes  Pathway 2 – Operational objective  Pathway 2 – Operational outcomes  Part 3 – Strategy implementation approach   and measuring results   32 Ensuring direction and accountability Monitoring implementation Digital transformation roles and responsibilities Scanning the horizon for what’s next Partnerships and communications Measurement and reporting  Annex  40Contents
#DigitalUNDP3 The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted how digital  connectivity is fast becoming the global metric of inclusion  and exclusion with 2.9 billion people still offline. The digital  divide, notably the lack of affordable broadband internet  and appropriate digital skills, have prevented many people,  especially the most vulnerable, from working or studying from  home during the crisis. Remarkably, one in three children  missed out on remote learning when COVID-19 shuttered  schools with students in countries with low human development  disproportionately affected. Notably, the digital divide is also  harmful to civil society and activists. Trapped offline, their ability  to advocate for change in key areas like climate action is stifled. Yet the pandemic also demonstrated the incredible power  of digital technology. From Honduras to Nigeria, the United  Nations (UN) assisted countries to leverage the potential  of digital finance to support critical electronic cash transfer  programmes, benefitting millions of people. In the Maldives and  Brazil, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)  supported parliaments to hold virtual sessions. Or look to the  contribution of the UNDP Accelerator Labs network. It utilized  the potential of 3D-printing to rapidly produce vital personal  protective equipment and helped to deploy robots in COVID-19  treatment centres in Rwanda and Kenya reducing healthcare  worker exposure to the virus. UNDP was ideally placed to offer  this type of support given that it already had a Digital Strategy  in place since 2019. That strategy prompted the organization  to embark on a profound digital transformation in both its  programmes and internal systems. Over 2,000 UNDP personnel  have upgraded their digital skills through new, specialized  courses -- and continue to do so. The related cultural change  also spurred the development of the open-access Data  Futures platform, for instance. Integrating data, analysis, and  visualizations, it is helping to inform key development policies  and programmes including in the vaccine equity sphere. With this new 2022-25 Digital Strategy, UNDP aims to get ahead   to the ever-evolving digital reality, equipped with the knowledge  and tools to support our partners at this time of rapid change. For  instance, digital technology can advance democracy and human  rights by boosting civic engagement, political participation,  Achim Steiner Administrator, United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP)Foreword
#DigitalUNDP4 and social accountability. And new e-platforms will make it  easier to access state services while reducing opportunities for  corruption. UNDP’s continued role as a trusted development  partner hinges on our ability to provide this now vital support.  The Strategy also highlights the challenges that digital  technology poses. That includes the fact that the pandemic has  accelerated growth in cybercrime and misinformation. Crucially,  the Strategy also elaborates on how digitalization is serving  as one of three enablers in UNDP’s 2022-2025 Strategic Plan  as we set bold objectives – from helping 100 million people  to escape multidimensional poverty to supporting 800 million  people to participate in elections.  This new Digital Strategy will guide UNDP in its efforts to   support countries to build inclusive, ethical, and sustainable  digital societies. It also recognizes that digitalization will continue  to re-shape how the organization responds to the monumental  challenges our world now faces. That includes using its power  to drive climate action and restore our natural world. And it will  also complement the UN’s wide-ranging global efforts to boost  the digital capacity of vulnerable and marginalized groups  including women and people with disabilities, for instance. In  many ways, the Strategy will future proof the organization for  the technological changes now and those yet to come, including  advancing ways to boost the digital expertise of our personnel.  This Digital Strategy demonstrates that UNDP refuses to stand  still. With the Sustainable Development Goals serving as our  guiding stars, we are looking beyond the immediate horizon  to continue offering cutting-edge development support at the  seminal moment for people and planet.
#DigitalUNDP5 UNDP1 launched its first Digital Strategy2 in   mid-2019 to harness digital transformation within   the organization. Building on a long history of  project-level digital support for partners3, the  strategy represented a systematic and corporatedriven transformation process to reimagine the   way UNDP serves its partners and operates its  systems and processes. The first Digital Strategy  proved to be prescient given the incredible  acceleration in digital transformation in response   to the COVID-19 pandemic. UNDP has changed significantly since the adoption  of the 2019 strategy, developing new capabilities  in digital programming and strengthening its digital  capabilities. UNDP will continue to accelerate these  efforts in response to growing demand from partner  governments. UNDP will also continue to support   our development partners to ensure that the arc of  future digital transformation protects human rights  and leaves no one behind. Digital Strategy 2022-2025 is intended to   maintain and accelerate the momentum that has  already been generated across UNDP and among  its partners. Indeed, many of the components are  already in place such as the Accelerator Labs4,  the Digital Advocates Network5, a comprehensive  IT transformation, and the Chief Digital Office6.  Continuing to build the capabilities of UNDP’s  workforce to imagine, plan, and implement integrated  digital approaches has the potential to truly generate  a multiplier effect on its support to partners.This Digital Strategy is structured in three   main parts: Part 1 – Guiding principles and value proposition:  Overview of UNDP’s approach to digital  transformation. Part 2 – Setting the course: Vision, objectives,  and outcomes towards which UNDP will continue  evolving over the next four years.  Part 3 – Strategy implementation approach   and measuring results: High-level approach   to implementing the strategy. The new UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025  highlighted the importance of digital as one of the  key enablers. This renewed Digital Strategy builds  upon the Strategic Plan, and puts forth a vision  whereby digital is an empowering force for   people and planet. To achieve this vision, three objectives are outlined:  two programmatic and one operational, in a  continuation of the bimodal approach of the first  Digital Strategy. The first objective is to use digital to  amplify UNDP's programming work. Secondly, UNDP  will look to strengthen inclusive digital ecosystems.  Finally, the third objective is focused on transforming  UNDP into a digitally native organization, fully  equipped with the digital skills, processes, and data  necessary for UNDP to continue as the development  partner of choice for the digital age. This strategy is anchored in the Secretary-General’s  Roadmap for Digital Cooperation7 as well as the  framework presented by Our Common Agenda8,  articulating the unique role of UNDP within the   UN System in countries and globally. It is directly  aligned with, and intended to support, the   UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-20259. The strategy also  provides a complementary framework for the UNDP  IT Strategy 2020-2023 and the UNDP Data Strategy  2020-2021, as well as several other corporate and  regional efforts such as the Accelerator Lab Network  and the work of the Strategic Innovation Unit10.Executive summary Digital: We define digital as  • An ever-evolving range of technologies (like mobile  technologies, artificial intelligence, machine learning,  blockchain, Internet of Things, and robotics to name  a few) that impact all aspects of our world.  • A mindset, which translates into a new way of  working that enables people and institutions to  innovate with technology.
#DigitalUNDP6 In many ways, increasingly powerful digital  technologies represent an opportunity to  accelerate progress towards the achievement  of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  by 2030. Most governments globally are rapidly  increasing their use of digital technology, creating  opportunities to deliver more responsive and  effective services to citizens, including women.11  Countries with developed digital infrastructures  such as digital payments and identification  systems have responded more effectively to the  COVID-19 pandemic than countries whose digital  infrastructures are less developed.12 Businesses  and jobs are also changing: the latest World  Economic Forum (WEF) report on the Future of  Jobs suggests companies in 26 advanced and  emerging economies are rapidly digitalizing  their working processes.13 Greater digitalization  is also linked to economic resilience; more  advanced digital economies were on track to  experience smaller downward GDP adjustments  in 2021.14 In the most highly connected  economies, digital infrastructure may mitigate  more than half of the long-term negative  economic impact of COVID-19.15  Despite the promise of digital technologies,  they also bring real and growing challenges.  COVID-19 has drawn attention to the urgency   of closing the digital divide, especially  for women and marginalized population  segments. In low-income countries, 70 percent  of households are not yet covered by fixed  broadband networks, 33 percent are out of  reach of mobile internet (4G), and 234 million  fewer women than men use mobile internet,  with women 15 percent less likely to own a smartphone.16, 17 New challenges continue to  arise such as data privacy, cybercrime, and mis-  and disinformation proliferating through digital  platforms.18 In addition, national policy and  regulatory frameworks for new technologies  are often implemented in a reactive, uncertain,  and piecemeal manner. Finally, rapid and  pervasive change can be disruptive, straining  the limited capacity of governments that  frequently lack the skilled human resources and  infrastructure to respond. It is not a given that  digital transformation drives greater inclusion;  in fact, it may further exacerbate inequalities,  discrimination, marginalization of vulnerable  populations, and abuse of human rights.19   Digital can also have unintended negative  impact on climate change and environment  through increased energy use, supply chain  (material extraction, waste management), and  increased or unsustainable consumption and  production patterns. Seized by the need to ensure relevance at this  time of rapid digital change, UNDP launched its  first Digital Strategy in 2019, sparking a corporate  effort to drive significant changes across both  its programmatic offerings and its operational  systems. When the COVID-19 pandemic struck,  that effort became even more urgent as  requests for UNDP support in digital surged.  UNDP supported over 60 partner governments  to deploy critical digital technologies to  maintain business continuity during the brunt  of the pandemic. Over 250 digitally enabled  programme responses to COVID-19 were  developed, ranging from developing digital  case management systems for social workers Introduction reimagine development in a digital age.Digital technology is a fundamental force for change in this century, reshaping economies,  government, and civil society – thereby impacting almost every aspect of development.   The profound consequences and exponential pace of digital transformation demands both  local action and global leadership to
#DigitalUNDP7 to provide emergency assistance to connecting  informal market vendors, many of whom are  women, to e-commerce platforms to maintain  their livelihoods.  The past two-and-a-half years have seen a  remarkable expansion in the use of digital in  UNDP. The organization has explored new  digital delivery models, digital partnerships,   and advocacy on pressing digital issues.  In terms of its internal operations, UNDP  has adopted new strategies for information  technology and data, launching several new  corporate-wide technology platforms. However, UNDP’s digital transformation is far  from over, and several key challenges remain.  A more strategic and integrated approach to  digital programming must be adopted. Efforts  thus far have largely been opportunistic, in  response to partner demand, leading to uneven  adoption across thematic areas and countries.  Data infrastructure and capabilities must be  further strengthened to enable shared data  exchanges for decision making and corporatewide knowledge management. A digital culture  must be embedded in the organization, and  digital literacy among UNDP personnel needs  to be urgently improved in order to utilize digital  infrastructure and tools to their fullest potential. Building on the progress from the first strategy,  this Digital Strategy will chart the continuation  of UNDP’s journey in digital transformation  over the next four years (2022-2025). With this  renewed strategy, UNDP puts forth a long-term  vision to help create a world in which digital is  an empowering force for people and planet.  This vision is closely aligned with the recently  approved UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025,  which outlines how UNDP will seek to support  countries in three directions of change –  structural transformation, leaving no one  behind, and building resilience – and underlines  the importance of digital as one of three  enablers along with strategic innovation and  development financing to achieve this change. As with the first strategy, UNDP's digital  transformation will continue to address both  external and internal challenges. Three  objectives are outlined: two programmatic  and one operational. First, UNDP will harness  digital technology to amplify the effects of  its programming. Second, as the societies  UNDP serves increasingly adopt digital  technology themselves, we will ensure that  inclusive digital ecosystems20 are built that  are empowering and that leave no one  behind. Finally, the third objective speaks  to the ongoing operational transformation  that UNDP needs to continue implementing  to enable this change. UNDP will become  a digitally native organization. That means  fostering a digital mindset, enhancing digital  literacy and skills, ensuring our internal  systems and processes are fit for purpose  and future-proofed, as well as using data  strategically. These capabilities are essential   if UNDP is to continue as the partner of choice  for development in the digital age.  The next four years will be critical in  determining how digital technology can play  a positive role in development, reversing the  economic and social damage from COVID-19,  and accelerating progress towards the SDGs  while mitigating emergent digital challenges  and risks. UNDP will continue to be bold and  ambitious in our digital transformation efforts  to make sure that we are the organization   that the world needs us to be. 
#DigitalUNDP8 Digital Strategy 2019-2021 In 2019, UNDP introduced its first Digital Strategy (2019-2021) to harness the  power of digital technology and innovation to respond more effectively to  development challenges. This first Digital Strategy was built on two interrelated  transformation pathways: Pathway 1 focused on programmatic outcomes to improve UNDP’s partner  experience and solve development challenges through innovations in delivery,  collaboration models, and joint advocacy.  Pathway 2 focused on operational outcomes to improve systems, internal  processes, and data usage and to enhance knowledge sharing.  The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic rapidly accelerated UNDP’s digital  transformation. New organizational and governance structures such as the  Chief Digital Office, Data Governance Group, and Digital Governance Group  were established, and in March 2020, UNDP approved an IT Strategy to  double down on this internal transformation. Moreover, due to social distancing  restrictions, the pandemic also catalysed the process of incorporating digital  into UNDP programming. For example, the Rapid Financing Facility (RFF)  was established in support of the UNDP Beyond Recovery COVID-19 offer. It  received 129 proposals, more than a third of which had a digital component.  The demand from our development partners continues to grow rapidly,  reinforcing the urgent need for UNDP to continue to adapt. Please see the  “Assessment of  Progress to Date” in  the Annex for details. >
#DigitalUNDP9 86% believe that digital  technologies are very  important to UNDP's role  in supporting its  development partners  to achieve the SDGs75% have seen a signiﬁcant  or moderate increase  in demand for support  from partners on digital  transformation over  the past 2.5 years 70% believe that UNDP has become better at  collaborating online  within the organization 55% believe that UNDP  has signiﬁcantly or  moderately improved  the eﬃciency of its work  over the past 2.5 yearsA recent survey among UNDP personnel illustrates the importance of digital development   and the changes that UNDP has seen programmatically and operationally:
#DigitalUNDP10 Part 1 – Guiding principles  and value proposition
#DigitalUNDP11 The Digital Strategy 2022-2025 directly responds to and builds upon UNDP’s  Strategic Plan 2022-202521, which highlights the critical role of digital technology  in achieving development outcomes. In UNDP's Strategic Plan 2022-2025,  digitalization is outlined as one of three key enablers – along with strategic  innovation and development financing – that will drive UNDP’s efforts towards  the 2030 agenda over the next four years. The Strategic Plan notes that digital   is to be built into all dimensions of UNDP’s work, including in the programming  of its six Signature Solutions.22 It also notes the need for UNDP to support its  partners in holistic digital transformation efforts, to advocate for inclusive and  responsible digital solutions for sustainable development, and to continue its   own digital transformation.  This strategy is anchored in the Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital  Cooperation23 as well as the framework presented by Our Common Agenda24,  articulating the unique role of UNDP within the UN System in countries and  globally. Further, it upholds the relevance and value of foundational UN  frameworks including the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration  of Human Rights, and other international human rights instruments, the 2030  Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, and the Paris Agreement on  climate change. UNDP's approach to digital must be principled and based within the organization's  areas of comparative advantage and value addition. The following section outlines  the set of guiding principles that will support UNDP's work in digital as well the  organization's value proposition in this space.
#DigitalUNDP12 UNDP puts human rights at the centre Human rights will be at the centre of UNDP's approach to digital, as digital  technologies increasingly mediate everything from health care, employment,  education, to participation in social, cultural, and political life. As digital technology  evolves so does our understanding of its impact on human rights - whether positive  or negative. UNDP will continue to provide leadership in areas where rights  intersect digital development, working in close collaboration with human rights  colleagues across the UN System to ensure a coordinated and robust approach. UNDP promotes inclusive and gender-sensitive approaches that leave   no one behind UNDP advocates for digital transformation that is intentionally inclusive, and  thoughtfully designed and implemented, to ensure that all processes put people  at the centre. The aim of people-centred digital transformation should be to build  a more open, transparent, and accessible society that leaves no one behind.  Digital transformation must address the needs of the most poor and vulnerable,  and mitigate the tendency for digital to reflect and amplify existing inequalities. In  particular, UNDP is recognized as a leader in gender empowerment, and gender  will be mainstreamed across its digital work to address the persistent and emerging  challenges affecting women in the digital realm.  UNDP contributes to shared global standards and frameworks that   protect people’s rights   As digital transformation accelerates, UNDP will ensure that its digital work is  aligned with and supports global standards such as the UN Charter25 and the  Universal Declaration of Human Rights.26 In addition, UNDP will continue to align  with the Principles for Digital Development27, will continue to contribute to the  EDISON Alliance Shared Principles for an Inclusive Financial System and the UN  Principles for Responsible Digital Payments28. Normative frameworks are not static,  and UNDP will continue to be an active participant in processes to develop and  propagate standards to strengthen digital rights across social, economic, cultural,  and environmental issues.Guiding principles  As digital technology rapidly evolves, it is vital that UNDP’s approach remains rooted  in clear principles based on experience and international frameworks that put  people and planet first. UNDP’s Digital Strategy 2022-2025 approach upholds the  guiding principles of rights, access, empowerment, and opportunity, particularly for  marginalized populations. UNDP commits to the following approach:
#DigitalUNDP13 UNDP advocates for open digital standards and open data UNDP advocates for open digital standards to unlock scale, reusability  and interoperability. Leveraging digital public goods can unlock  transformative solutions and digital infrastructures to enable a more  equitable and transparent future, with a strong emphasis on protecting  rights and preventing misuse. UNDP supports open standards for  digital technologies through policy and technology support as well as  encouraging broad community participation in decision making. UNDP  will continue this work in collaboration with partners like the Digital Public  Goods Alliance. 29 Open data will be a key element of UNDP's work on  data, empowering transparency, accountability and unlocking innovation.  This approach also encourages greater citizen participation and supports  democratic governance.  UNDP works to strengthen local digital ecosystems  UNDP employs a whole-of-society approach30 and works with local  leaders, companies, and digital innovators to develop thriving local  digital ecosystems built on inclusivity, sustainability, accountability, and  rights. Recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all approach, and that  communities are best-placed to identify and shape solutions, UNDP will  take a human-centred approach that adapts to needs,  reflects local  diversity and knowledge and supports the rule of law and national human  rights institutions. UNDP leverages strategic partnerships to catalyse inclusive  approaches to digital development Partnerships are critical to catalyse inclusive approaches to digital  development, including the provision of adequate resources to implement  the relevant international standards to safeguard and protect people. We  will pursue partnerships with global and local entrepreneurs, technologists,  academics, researchers, activists, policymakers, private sector leaders, and  other UN agencies, actively fostering creative dialogue and collaboration  with local stakeholders around the present and future of digital innovation. 
#DigitalUNDP14 Value proposition UNDP’s role and positioning in the digital development space, and therefore its ability  to deliver on this strategy, stem from several defining features of the organization: Broad mandate and integrator role in the UN System UNDP’s broad mandate on poverty and inequality enables the organization  to play an integrator role in the UN System, especially in countries working  within UN country teams, and it can be applied to the digital development  space. This unique characteristic allows UNDP to maintain strong relationships  with the central parts of governments, to leverage its thematic and technical  experience across all SDGs, work across sectors and enable connections to  take a holistic approach to digital transformation across society. Longstanding expertise in supporting governments on digital  transformation UNDP has extensive experience in working with governments across all  geographies and levels, providing neutral, expert, and independent support  on diverse aspects of their digital transformation, from strategy to technology  procurement, as well as convening across public and private sectors and  capacity building. UNDP has supported the development of critical public  digital infrastructures like digital payments in a range of countries, and  continues to support countries assess their digital readiness. Since the onset  of the COVID-19 pandemic, UNDP received over 30 requests to support  countries to develop their digital strategies. UNDP itself seeks to continually  push our digital capabilities and expertise, to ensure we stay ahead of  evolving digital opportunities and challenges. Rights-based, intentionally inclusive, approach Inclusion and the protection of human rights are core to UNDP’s mission.  While there is a host of actors who seek to support digital transformation  of countries across the public and private sectors, UNDP will continue to  advocate for and implement ‘intentionally inclusive’ approaches to digital  development that place people at the centre. This includes longstanding  expertise in developing ‘gender responsive’ approaches. 
#DigitalUNDP15 Proactive consideration of potential risks of digital technology UNDP recognizes that, along with the benefits that technology can bring,  there are also potential risks and challenges, particularly for vulnerable  populations. These risks can take different forms, the most serious of which  are risks to human rights. To anticipate and mitigate such risks, UNDP takes  a critical and rigorous approach to the selection and application of digital  technologies and partners. Unparalleled country presence UNDP operates in 170 countries, including in fragile and conflict-affected  areas. UNDP also has strong ties to local digital and innovation ecosystems  through the Accelerator Lab Network, which has been set up in 91 locations  covering 115 countries. This enables UNDP to develop solutions that are  rooted in local ecosystems and which can be scaled and adapted to fit  multiple contexts.
#DigitalUNDP16 Part 2 –   Setting the course
#DigitalUNDP17 Vision and objectives  This renewed Digital Strategy is based on UNDP’s experiences implementing the  previous Digital Strategy, the Strategic Plan, and its exploration of the outlook for the  future of digital development. It is grounded in UNDP’s longstanding commitment  to eradicating poverty and supporting countries in their progress towards the 2030  Agenda for Sustainable Development31, the Paris Agreement32, and the approach  outlined in the previous section. It is also supportive of several existing strategies  within UNDP, including the IT Strategy 2020-2023, the Data Strategy and the People  For 2030 Strategy33. UNDP’s long-term vision is to help create a world in which digital is an empowering  force for people and planet. To make progress towards this long-term vision, UNDP will continue to evolve its two  pathways to change, which reflect the programmatic and operational capabilities  needed to achieve the following mutually reinforcing objectives: Pathway 1 – Programmatic objectives Digitally enabled programming: Amplify development outcomes by  embedding digital across all UNDP programming. Empowering digital ecosystems: Support societies in their efforts to create  more inclusive and resilient digital ecosystems34. Pathway 2 – Operational objectives Digitally native UNDP: Transform UNDP so that it has fit-for-purpose  digital systems, processes, tools, and data, as well as a digitally competent  workforce to effectively support the first two objectives. The following sections will expand upon the three objectives outlined above as well  as a set of outcomes that represent the 'changed state' of the organization by the  end of the strategy's duration. A non-exhaustive set of example priority initiatives for  each outcome is also identified.+   +   +  To understand how development will  change as digital transformation accelerates,  UNDP partnered with the Institute for the  Future to map possible future scenarios.  Following the Alternative Futures  methodology, we developed four possible  scenarios that informed the development  of Digital Strategy 2022-2025  Please see Annex for the full scenarios. >
#DigitalUNDP18 UNDP’s long-term vision To help create a world in which digital is an empowering  force for people and planet.#DigitalUNDP
#DigitalUNDP 19 Programmatic  Operational Digitally native UNDPOBJECTIVES PATHWAYS OUTCOMES Practice leader Thought leader Trusted partner  and convener Systems and processesPeople and culture Data and knowledgeEmpowering digital ecosystemsDigitally enabled  programmingFigure 1 — Digital Strategy 2022-2025 strategic focus
#DigitalUNDP20 Pathway 1 – Programmatic objectives This strategy has two mutually reinforcing objectives related to UNDP's  programmatic work. The first objective is to embed digital across UNDP’s own  programming, harnessing the potential of digital technology to accelerate our  progress towards the SDGs. Digital technologies offer a radical opportunity to  reconsider much of the way UNDP works, bringing fresh tools and possibilities  to existing challenges.  The second objective is focused on developing digital ecosystems that are  empowering. This means supporting countries in their digital transformation  journey at a societal level, and creating a network of actors and systems that  ensures that human rights are protected and no one is left behind in this digital  environment. Digital transformation can be disruptive and, without concerted  action, can bring risks such as loss of transparent system operation, loss of  regulation, and increasing inequality. UNDP supports countries to not only  harness the clear opportunities that digital technologies bring, but also ensure  that those risks are considered and mitigated along the way.  1.A Digitally enabled programming As noted in previous sections, UNDP has seen a surge in the need, scope and  quantity of digital solutions that support the organization’s work across all six  Signature Solutions identified in the Strategic Plan 2022-2025. This trend is  being driven largely by requests from partners seeking in many cases ad-hoc  and specific solutions to respond to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic35. Our next step is to build on the creativity and experience gained from these  initiatives and develop strategic and integrated digital-first approaches across  programming in all six Signature Solutions. This means: • Identifying, sharing and integrating learnings from digital solutions that  emerge from UNDP country offices; • Working to scale proven solutions, including the incorporation of digital  public goods36 into UNDP thematic programming as appropriate; • Understanding how digital approaches can be enhanced by considering  enabling factors such as interoperability with other systems, common  standards, and global frameworks; • Clearly articulating the risks and challenges posed by digital technologies in  each thematic area, including the importance of a rights-based approach in  deploying digital solutions and mitigating their potential negative impact; and • Scanning the horizon so that new technology developments can be  understood, incorporated, and deployed as appropriate. Ultimately, UNDP will fully incorporate digital into each thematic area of  programming in a way that can guide the organization’s practice, allowing for  innovation to flourish while ensuring overall coherence in digital programming. Embedding digital in UNDP’s programming will be supported by the further  rollout of ‘Digital by Default’, an approach in which digital outputs become a  standard consideration of programme design and delivery. This approach is  currently being integrated into UNDP's processes along the programme and  project life cycle.OBJECTIVES PATHWAYS OUTCOMES
#DigitalUNDP21 1.B Empowering digital ecosystems The acceleration of digital approaches arising from the COVID-19 pandemic  has also led to growing requests from UNDP partners to support more  comprehensive digital strategy processes. These requests often arise because  of frustration over the fragmentation and lack of coherence in technology  implementation and/or because the benefits of digital platforms are not  equally distributed37. UNDP has an opportunity to support partners in building empowering digital  ecosystems that benefit all. Grounded in a whole-of-society  approach, UNDP  can support partners in adopting a holistic and inclusive approach when  planning and designing digital public policy. Digital has an impact on all of us:  governments, businesses, and civil society. Engaging this broader spectrum of  stakeholders in digital innovation supports inclusive design that can empower  vulnerable populations to access digital services, help to mitigate risks from  digital platforms, and establish accountability. This work will be done in close  collaboration with UN system partners and other development actors. This whole-of-society approach is illustrated below in Figure 2 (note: this  framework is still under development). UNDP has already supported efforts to  develop enabling infrastructure, improve accessibility to digital connectivity and  tools, and to support people’s capacity to use it in meaningful and responsible  ways across several countries. UNDP will continue to strengthen efforts  to address risks and harms brought by technology such as cybersecurity,  misinformation, and digital privacy concerns that pose threats to democratic  governance and social cohesion, following a rights-based approach . In Mauritania, UNDP is partnering with the Ministry  of Digital Transformation, Innovation and Public  Sector Modernization (MTNIMA) to advance the  country’s digital transformation based on a wholeof-society approach. UNDP’s offer in-country is  focused on strengthening digital foundations,  especially through the co-creation of governance,  institutional, and financing arrangements. These include the design and operationalization  of the Agence numérique de l’Etat (ANETA)  that the ministry is planning to establish  and will drive digital transformation across  ministries, the implementation of a set of priority  initiatives (including a feasibility study for the  implementation of a National Digital ID and  an e-Cabinet solution), building technical and  institutional capacities in various areas including  data science and data management, and finally  the development of a digital development basket  fund to finance priority initiatives. With these initiatives, UNDP is directly supporting  the achievement of Mauritania’s national  development plan (SCAPP 2016-2030), that  highlights the importance of utilizing the potential  of digital technology for development, for  example in areas such as health and education. Case Study —  Establishing a National Digital Agency in Mauritania
#DigitalUNDP22 MonitoringImpact commit mentsStartup  environme nt Financing incentives Technology adoption Fair mar ket competitionCybersecurity E-comme rceData stand ards and protectionLeadership and co-ordin ationFundi ng and procurementDigital public servicesInnova tion ecosyste mConne ctivity infrastructure Capabilities Ethical standardsDigital well-being Usage and ownershipCultureDigital literacy skillsAmbition                      STRATEGY                    Approach             Availability           Accessibility           PRINCIPLES FOR DIGITAL INCLUSION          Adoption        Awareness           Protection SECT ORAL OPPORTUNITIESBusinessPeople Government RegulationInfrastructure Inclusive whole-of-society digital  transformationFOUNDATIONAL DIGITAL CATALYSTS Data exchange    Digital legal identity     Digital paymentsFigure 2 — UNDP’s whole-of-society approach (BETA version)
#DigitalUNDP23 Pathway 1 – Programmatic outcomes Related to the two mutually reinforcing programmatic objectives outlined above,  UNDP will work towards three outcomes: UNDP is an established global leader of digital development based on its  country programming expertise across all regions. UNDP supports its partners  in ensuring that digital approaches are rights-based, inclusive and that their  benefits are shared by all. UNDP supports partners in developing policies  which are rooted in human rights and ethics, and that protect governments  and citizens from potential risks such as cybersecurity and data privacy. Rather  than build standalone digital solutions, UNDP takes a holistic approach to  supporting governments, including developing interoperable digital public  infrastructures, local innovation ecosystems, and digital skills building. UNDP  continuously innovates its programming portfolio, using foresight and exploring  and embracing new digital technologies as they emerge. UNDP actively seeks  opportunities to collaborate with the UN System and other development  partners in its digital development approaches. UNDP is a global voice of authority on the use of digital technology for  development, advocating for and advising on strategic, responsible, and  rights-based applications of digital technology. UNDP is a leader in collecting  evidence, raising awareness, forging consensus, sharing best practice, and  providing guidance on key issues related to the opportunities and risks that  arise with digital development. UNDP is a trusted partner and convenor across the public and private sectors  as well as an active contributor to discourse on inclusive digital ecosystems and  digital public goods. UNDP convenes global digital development conversations  while aggregating and leveraging its insights from its presence in the Global  South. Within the UN System, at country, regional and global levels, UNDP  works closely with other agencies and serves as an integrator and to ensure  digital approaches are coherent.OBJECTIVES PATHWAYS OUTCOMES 1. Practice leader 2. Thought leader 3. Trusted partner and convenor
#DigitalUNDP24 A whole-of-society digital transformation offer Support countries in designing and developing inclusive digital ecosystems  based on a whole-of-society approach that leaves no one behind. A holistic,  cross-sectoral national digital strategy, supported by local and global partners  and thematic expertise such as in gender, will help countries identify goals,  monitor progress and attract investment. This can then be followed by  implementation support across a number of areas. As a starting point, UNDP  has developed an inclusive framework that provides overarching, whole-ofsociety guidance, as well as a rapid digital readiness assessment that provides  a high-level snapshot of digital opportunities and challenges. Digitally enabled Signature Solutions Continue to strategically integrate digital across UNDP programming, supporting  the formulation and implementation of sectoral (e.g. digital health, digital finance,  etc.) and thematic (e.g. gender, smart cities, etc.) strategies and offers that  leverage digital technology for partner governments. A “Digital Guide” will be  developed for each of the six UNDP Signature Solutions, outlining how digital  technology can be meaningfully deployed in the respective thematic area. The  Digital Guides will be based on both good practices from UNDP country offices  as well as landscaping reviews across the development community.  Scalable innovations Incorporate experiences from country offices and regional bureaux,   UNDP will identify, adapt, and deploy frontier technologies such as artificial  intelligence (AI), data, blockchain, and Internet of Things to support  programming. UNDP will take a user-centred approach so our work with  governments is in service of those farthest behind, and always promotes human  rights. Digital innovations will be identified both through a bottom-up approach,  elevating scalable solutions from country offices and regional bureaux, and  through a top-down approach whereby strategic priorities are identified and  supported through programmes such as the Digital X Scale Accelerator   - a UNDP accelerator programme for bold and high-impact digital solutions -    or the data collaboration initiative with GIZ through which we are creating   a blueprint for data collaboration at the local level for countries. Thought leaderProgrammatic outcomes – Example initiatives Practice leader Forward-looking insights for digital development Develop knowledge products, integrating UNDP country office experience  with foresight and horizon-scanning38, to influence discourse and guide  development practice to support inclusive digital development. Focus areas  will include emerging issues such as: misinformation, online safety for women,  digital platforms for sustainable energy financing, and the impact of new  technologies on development outcomes, with a particular focus on fragile and  conflict-affected states.
#DigitalUNDP25 Technical guidance Develop practical resources to help our country offices and development  partners navigate new digital ecosystems, and understand better the  benefits and challenges of specific technologies (e.g. open source platforms  vs. proprietary solutions). Help UNDP partners effectively manage digital  technology, including potential risks related to related to cybersecurity, data  privacy, misinformation, and other areas emerging as priorities informed by  country offices, and to ensure that lessons learned, knowledge and insights are  shared across regions. In particular, emphasize the development of resources  that support the deployment of digital public goods, and other responsible  digital technologies.  Global norms and standards Convene partners for dialogues to develop and bridge country-level best  practices to the development and implementation of global norms and standards,  including for data privacy and protection, ethics, and human rights.  Trusted partner  and convenorPublic-private dialogue on digital development Convene key stakeholders to foster collaboration and innovation in order  to close the digital divide. UNDP will continue to establish public-private  partnerships, particularly with the technology sector, through its leading roles  such as board member of Digital Public Good Alliance , board member of the  WEF EDISON Alliance , and co-chair of the WEF 2030 Vision platform.  Digital cooperation process Lead/participate in key digital cooperation processes, including the SecretaryGeneral’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation and in the rollout of Our Common  Agenda implementation such as the Summit of the Future and the Global  Digital Compact.   Strategic UNDP technology partnerships Develop corporate-wide guidance on engagement with technology companies  in accordance with our principles, to ensure that partnerships promote rightsbased and inclusive applications of digital technology, and strengthen local  digital ecosystems. In particular, UNDP will develop corporate guidance on  engaging with platforms that may be (mis)used as a launchpad for disinformation,  hate speech or political violence.
#DigitalUNDP26 Embedding digital across UNDP’s existing  thematic areas is one of the core aspects of  this strategy. The gender team have already  been working on this for some time and have  developed a number of key entry points for  gender equality and digital transformation.  These will form a core part of the forthcoming  Gender Equality Strategy.  • Ensure national digital strategies and  policies are gender responsive (i.e., include  women at the decision-making level and  at the design and implementation stage,  identify and address the different aspects of  the gender digital divide, etc.).  • Promote women’s economic empowerment  through use of and access to digital tools for  income generation and entrepreneurship.  • Ensure women and girls become active  creators/producers in the digital economy, not  just consumers.  • Ensure digital public services (such as social  protection payments) are gender-responsive  and accessible for women and girls.  • Improve women’s and girls’ access and use  of foundational digital infrastructure, including  (mobile) connectivity, digital ID, digital finance. • Ensure and promote online safety for women  and girls.  Case Study —   Gender equality and digital transformation  As a governing member and co-host of the  Digital Public Goods Alliance, UNDP will  lead global cooperation on building digital  commons, catalyzing critical conversations on  the role of the global south and local digital  ecosystems as builders and implementers of  inclusive, equitable and safe digital foundations  and ecosystems through the discovery and  adoption of digital public goods (DPGs).   UNDP will support countries to implement  open and secure digital platforms that enable  a community of public and private sector actors  to unlock transformative solutions to solve  development challenges faced by countries, such  as in poverty alleviation, energy access and other  thematic areas of UNDP’s six signature solutions.  Through partnership and UNDP’s role as a   neutral convener, UNDP will drive collective  actions and capacity flows to countries,  championing robust governance and regulatory  frameworks to protect human rights, and enable  economic and social inclusion. Case Study —  Digital Public Goods Alliance
#DigitalUNDP27 Pathway 2 – Operational objective Digitally native UNDP The third objective is to continue UNDP's internal transformation  towards fit-for-purpose digital systems, processes, tools, data, and a  digitally competent workforce that will effectively advance the first two  objectives. The Digital Strategy 2022-2025 serves as the overarching  framework for digital across UNDP, with the Data Strategy, IT Strategy  and People 2030 Strategy and Competency Framework39 providing  additional depth and structure for their respective areas.  Based on the new People 2030 Strategy and Competency Framework,  UNDP will continue to strengthen digital capacity building of UNDP  personnel and to attract a diverse and digitally capable talent pool.  This will include ensuring that gender is embedded throughout digital  activities.  UNDP will lead by example and adopt best practices in the  development and use of digital technologies, tools, and platforms to  enhance our internal performance and render more effective services.  This will be carried out according to the UNDP IT Strategy 2020-2023. Responsible data collection, management, use, and analysis are  increasingly fundamental for UNDP’s work. UNDP will implement the  2022 Data Strategy and Knowledge Management Strategy40 to ensure  that UNDP becomes a data-driven organization with greater knowledge  management capabilities.OBJECTIVES PATHWAYS OUTCOMES
#DigitalUNDP28 Pathway 2 – Operational outcomes Three outcomes have been defined that will help achieve the objective  of a digitally native UNDP: UNDP has an agile and innovative culture with a digitally  competent workforce. UNDP will continue to build a fit-for-purpose digital infrastructure,  including systems and tools that enable continuous service   and process improvements, and delivery of high quality and   cost-effective services.  UNDP leverages data and knowledge as strategic assets. UNDP  conducts inclusive, rights-based, and sustainable data collection  and management, use, and analysis. UNDP’s evolving knowledge  management work ensures that evidence is shared to inform   decision making, and that learning systems are in place to continually  iterate and enhance the organizations’ ability to respond to   emergent complexity. OBJECTIVES PATHWAYS OUTCOMES 1. People and culture 2. Systems and processes 3. Data and knowledge
#DigitalUNDP29 Digital Advocates Network Empower and leverage the Digital Advocates Network, a network launched in 2021,  with over 120 people from across UNDP. Every country office, regional bureau, and  HQ division has one Digital Advocate to drive digital change in their teams.  Digital capacity-building Introduce the Digital Fitness Programme, a digital training curriculum that will  launch in early 2022 to help country offices improve their digital maturity in  terms of capabilities, mindsets, and activities.41 Additionally, UNDP’s Office of  Human Resources (OHR) will offer a set of certificate courses to UNDP senior  leaders in the domains of data, analytics, evidence-based decision making and  digitalization, as part of the Excellence in Business Management domain of the  Leaders for 2030 programme.  Digital capabilities and competencies Firstly, create an organizational landscape analysis for digital skills based on  the results of the organizational capability assessment exercise conducted in  late 2021 by OHR, Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (BPPS), and the  Crisis Bureau (CB). This will help identify where to focus recruitment and talent  development efforts, to ensure that UNDP invests in and builds skills that are  currently lacking. Secondly, review standard job profiles/roles, and add new digital-related  competencies in job profiles based on the new People 2030 Strategy and  Competency Framework. This includes competences that will help drive  the culture we need, including digital awareness and literacy in the crossfunctional competences, and ‘think innovatively’ and ‘act with agility’ in the  behavioural competences.  New ways of working Organization-wide efforts to work in more agile, adaptive, and responsive ways  are already underway, accelerated by COVID-19 and by the rapidly changing local  and global environments. Adoption and use of new corporate digital platforms  and remote work will continue to be key elements of creating a hybrid workplace.  Moreover, the Accelerator Labs, the Strategic Innovation Unit and others, have  already been working on creating a culture of innovation and will continue playing  a key role going forward. UNDP will continue to increase usage of innovative  approaches like foresight and collective sense-making, and service design. Operational outcomes – Example initiatives People and culture  Systems and  processesUNDP’s IT Strategy 2020-2023 focuses primarily on ensuring that systems  and processes are in place to enable the organization to achieve digital  transformation. The strategy includes seven critical outcomes aimed at ensuring  that IT is a service-oriented business partner for the organization, able to quickly  develop new services, offer high quality data management support, and provide  security for UNDP’s digital environment and data assets. 
#DigitalUNDP30 Over the course of this strategy, UNDP will continue to implement the IT Strategy,  while also driving the following complementary initiatives:  Digital by Default Embed digital into standard UNDP processes – such as Country Programme  Documents, corporate reporting processes, procurement processes, risk  registers, etc. Acceleration of digitization Strengthen ICT infrastructure for country offices without adequate connectivity  and tools, and fully digitize UNDP documentation.  Ensuring wide adoption and use of corporate-wide solutions Provide training to relevant UNDP personnel and develop policies and  procedures to ensure new corporate-wide solutions such Quantum (UNDP’s  new management system), UNall (UNDP’s service management platform),  UNITY (UNDP’s donor and resource mobilization system), UNDP’s Data Futures  platform42 and other corporate digital solutions are used effectively. In addition,  ensure that these systems are made available to partner agencies, and adapted  to their needs where appropriate. Leverage digital approaches to optimize business processes Review key areas such as procurement, HR, and finance to maximize the use of  digital and to further streamline business processes to align with the fast-paced  digital ecosystem in which UNDP operates.  Updating existing policies and procedures Revise existing Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures (POPP) to  better adapt to digital-related opportunities and challenges.43 Data and  knowledge UNDP has made significant investments in a corporate data architecture that  includes cutting-edge self-service storage, distribution, and analysis tools. It will  continue to strengthen digital infrastructure, tools, governance, and capacitybuilding to ensure that data and knowledge can be used as strategic assets.  UNDP’s Data Strategy lays the foundation for an in-depth review of UNDP’s data  needs and ensures that governance processes are in place to manage data in a  manner that is effective and ethical, with clear lines of escalation for any issues  that arise. Organization-wide data capacity building activities are in place to  foster a workforce that is future-ready and can harness data in daily workflows. 
#DigitalUNDP31 Data guiderails for values-driven governance processes Publish a set of data guiderails to empower a ‘self-service’ governance approach,  where teams and individuals across the organization can easily find topics  that direct them to extract maximum value from data. These guiderails will  cover a comprehensive spectrum of topics including, but not limited to, usage,  sharing, privacy, retention, acquisition, compliance, security, masking, quality  management, transparency, standardization, integrations, and technology. The  data guiderails will be continuously improved and new guide rails will be added  on emerging topics. Decision-making structure Continue to strengthen the Data Governance Group44. It will use a ‘govern-byexception’ model to reduce the drag in operationalizing initiatives that follow the  established data guiderails and provide guidance and prioritization to strategic  data initiatives and use cases. Strong data culture Build a data community aimed towards changing the mindset of the organization  to leverage data as a shared, strategic asset for all of UNDP with consistent,  transparent standards for analysis and collection. We will foster a culture that  values openness and sharing by default by taking an integrated whole-of-UN  approach that enables more synergy through sharing and data interoperability.  Continue to provide knowledge-sharing and learning opportunities such as ‘Data  Thursdays,’ a series of webinars on different data-related themes.  Data-savvy global workforce Provide basic data training for the entire organization and deliver specialized  training around data analysis, data visualization, machine learning, and other  emerging technologies and approaches on-demand. In addition, provide support  to teams and country offices to onboard new skills required to transform data  and analytics into valuable insights. Future-ready green data infrastructure and tools Develop a unified data hub with a data lake and a corporate data catalogue  to enable UNDP staff to ‘self-serve’ their data needs. Continue to develop  innovative uses for UNDP’s data. New strategy for knowledge management (pending) The forthcoming knowledge management strategy is connecting the  organization vertically and horizontally through world-class thought  leadership, dynamic knowledge networks and through real-time application  of knowledge. The first objective will seek to connect UNDP’s global-to-local  and local-to-global knowledge to ensure it is available in real time. The second  objective will emphasise dynamic learning and dedicated spaces for  cross-disciplinary collaboration.
#DigitalUNDP32 Part 3 – Strategy  implementation approach  and measuring results 
#DigitalUNDP33 The following section outlines the approach to implementing and monitoring the strategy  for the duration of this strategy. Given that digital technology and its role in development are constantly evolving, it is  critical for us to take an agile and collaborative approach. The implementation of the  strategy will therefore undergo a refresh after the initial two years. This will be a chance  to reflect on UNDP’s successes mid-way through and allow for any necessary shifts based  on emerging insights and in response to local demands. Ensuring direction and accountability The Chief Digital Officer will be the executive champion and senior official accountable  for this strategy and will coordinate implementation across the different levels of the  organization. In addition:  The Executive Group (EG)45, supported by the Organizational Performance Group  (OPG) 46as necessary, will continue to provide guidance on the overall strategic  direction of the implementation of Digital Strategy 2022-2025;  The Digital Governance Group (DGG) will continue to serve as a primary mechanism  for resource allocation for operationally oriented, non-recurring digital investments.  The DGG will also regularly review the progress of the strategy’s implementation; A 'sounding board', comprising a group of 5-10 annually selected and rotating  Resident Representatives, once established, will advise on the programmatic and  country-facing initiatives. Additional advisory mechanisms may be considered over the implementation period of  the strategy (including government, civil society, academia, and private sector) in order to  ensure ongoing relevance of UNDP's digital work. Monitoring implementation   The day-to-day monitoring of the strategy implementation will be the responsibility of  the Chief Digital Officer. As mentioned above, the Digital Governance Group will monitor  the implementation of the strategy on a half-yearly basis, including the updating of the  implementation plan.   The implementation plan will cover 2022-2023 and will be updated at the end of 2023 to  cover the following two-year period. This will allow the implementation of the strategy to  remain agile and adapt as needed to the rapidly changing digital development landscape. The implementation of Digital Strategy 2022-2025 will be aligned and monitored closely  with the following corporate strategies (and their associated governance mechanisms)  due to the interdependencies during implementation: • The UNDP IT Strategy  • The UNDP Data Strategy  • The UNDP People for 2030 Strategy  • The UNDP Gender Equality Strategy 
#DigitalUNDP34 Under the leadership of the Chief Digital Officer, risks related to the implementation   of the strategy will be identified and managed/escalated in accordance with the  organization's Enterprise Risk Management policies and procedures.  Risk identification and monitoring will include two main types of risks: Risks related to digital technology/digital development These are emergent risks related to the evolution in digital technologies and  interactions with our partners and/or the development context. For example:  the risk that the persistent digital divide becomes a major driver of inequality   in the contexts in which we work.  Risks directly related to UNDP’s ability to deliver the strategy  These include risks related to UNDP's digital transformation. For example:   the risk of insufficient capabilities in the organization to meet the objectives of  the Digital Strategy. Digital transformation roles and responsibilities The successful implementation of Digital Strategy 2022-2025 will require shared  ownership of digital transformation throughout the organization.  As mentioned above, the Chief Digital Office will continue to lead, coordinate, and  support the digital transformation effort. However, the nature of that support will shift  over time. As indicated in Figure 3, as the maturity of UNDP's digital transformation  progresses, the digital transformation support roles will shift as the capabilities of the  broader organization increase.  For the duration of this strategy, UNDP central and regional bureaux, together with the  country offices, will take on the primary role for driving and supporting digital execution  as the Chief Digital Office focuses on strategic positioning, capabilities building,  digital innovation and scaling support (including Digital Public Goods), best practices  dissemination, digital partnerships and thought leadership in specific substantive areas  as necessary47.
#DigitalUNDP35 Initial state Current state Chief Digital Office The Chief Digital Office helps to accelerate  the digital transformation by focusing on  strategic transformation topics, execution and  providing critical capabilities at the beginning.  With a growing digital maturity, the Bureaux  and Country Offices begin to drive most digital  execution with the Chief Digital Office having   a supportive role.Target state Embedded Digital execution is  fully distributed and  embedded throughout  the organization, including  Country Offices.  Digital is at the core of  planning and execution  across all countries and  functional areas, including  programmatic and  operational issues. The Chief Digital Office  fully transitions to a digital  hub/ center of excellence  that is integrated in the  organization.  Focus is  on thought leadership/ policy and practice  support in specific  areas, coordinating  best practice exchange,  scaling of digital solutions,  horizon scanning and  partnerships. New trends or  technologies – or flagship  initiatives - may require  a corporate approach  for leadership/adoption  within the organization.Hybrid The Chief Digital Office  focusses on setting global  frameworks to digitally  enable and support regional  and country teams. Bureaux build digital  execution capabilities  (programmatic and  operational) across country  offices and functional areas.Corporate UNDP appoints corporate  digital lead to own   digital agenda across the  organization. Corporate digital capabilities  and execution to deliver and  scale solutions.Opportunistic Digital solutions are  scattered across the  organization. Digital capacity and  capability is dispersed  across the organization.Distributed Bureaux drive digital  execution across Country  Offices and functional  Areas within established  corporate strategies and  frameworks. The Chief Digital Office  begins transition to a  hub/ center of excellence,  focusing on specific areas  of thought leadership/ policy and practice  support, scaling of digital  capabilities, digital solution  scaling, best practices  dissemination and  partnerships.  The Chief Digital  Office continues to  provide transformation  management and  coordination.Figure 3 — Digital maturity progression in UNDP 2019 2025 2021
#DigitalUNDP36 Achieving the 'Distributed' and 'Embedded' states outlined in Figure 3 will require a  networked approach of UNDP's various functions and levels. Specifically: Country offices will be the primary drivers of digital programme design and  implementation in the field. They will be supported by networked Digital  Advocates with specialized training as well as ICT associates who will support  the rollout of new corporate systems and processes. Country offices will have  the option to participate in the Digital Fitness Programme aimed at establishing  robust digital capacities inside UNDP (see initiatives under 'People and culture'   in previous section). Accelerator Labs will support innovation of digital solutions based on the local  context and through country-led experimentation. As a network, labs will also  share emerging practices across country offices and codify learning based  on digital and other solutions as part of the effort to enable scaling of digital  innovation across UNDP.  Regional bureaux will continue to be the first backstop for country office  support, while identifying regional programmatic opportunities and leading  regional digital partnerships. They will have a Digital Facilitator who is part   of the Digital Advocates Network, enabling cross-country and regional sharing   of digital expertise and resources. Regional Innovation Advisors, who are part   of the global Strategic Innovation Unit, can provide support to help assess how  an office is leveraging digital assets across its projects as part of a broader  portfolio sensemaking exercise; and help identify opportunities for strategic  deployment of digital in the context of the development of new portfolio offers  for government counterparts. Global headquarters will provide corporate guidance and support for the  application of digital to programming as well as digital systems and process  support. The Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (BPPS) and the Crisis  Bureau (CB) teams will create policies, guidance, and assist with programming  design for digital work in specific thematic areas. The Bureau for Management  Services (BMS) will create policies, guidance, and tools to support the digital  transformation of corporate operational processes including the modernization  and deployment of corporate systems. The Bureau for External Relations  and Advocacy (BERA) will continue to develop key partnerships in support  of corporate transformation. Headquarters units will also support knowledge  management efforts for digital approaches across various areas. Global policy centres/centres of excellence provide an opportunity to extend  UNDP's capacity in specific policy/thought leadership areas. Existing Global  Policy Centres such as the Global Centre for Technology, Innovation, and  Sustainable Development in Singapore and the Oslo Governance Centre will  continue to make important policy and research contributions to UNDP's digital  work. To reinforce UNDP's capacity in specific areas related to digital technology,  additional 'Centres of Excellence' will also be considered.
#DigitalUNDP37 Scanning the horizon for what's next Given the accelerating pace of change of digital technology and the likelihood of  associated disruptions, it is important to support the implementation of the Digital  Strategy with a capability to identify new and emerging technologies and technologyrelated impacts on the development context, on people and planet. Working with others across the organization, the Chief Digital Office will lead on  building continuous forward-looking capability and resources for the organization  in frontier areas that serve as key enablers. CDO will undertake horizon scanning,  strategic foresight, and the development of new digital approaches as part of crosscutting digital offers, collaborating with the Bureau for Policy and Programme Support  (BPPS), Crisis Bureau (CB), Bureau for Management Services (BMS), regional bureaux,  Global Policy Centres, and others. To ensure maximum organizational agility in anticipating new trends, there will be a   need for work across multiple horizons spanning from the now to the near future to  the far future (see Figure 4).  Figure 4 - Horizon scanning48 First Horizon Second HorizonNEAR FUTURE NOW FAR FUTURE Third Horizon  Current transformation  eﬀorts –IT, Data, culture, capabilityDigital X Scale Accelerator Accelerator Labs Strategic Innovation Current paradigms Assumptions Data InfrastructureEmerging paradigms Ideas InnovationsIncremental adjustmentsForesight and frontier  technology research  and thought leadership
#DigitalUNDP38 Partnerships and communications Partnerships are a critical part of UNDP's digital transformation. At the country level, UNDP will partner with other members of the UN country  team, working closely with the Resident Coordinator to make available UNDP’s  digital development expertise as a core UN offer. UNDP will also convene,  empower, and collaborate with local digital ecosystem players. At the regional level, UNDP will pursue common agendas, such as on data, with  the regional UN commissions and regional bodies to advocate for inclusive digital  transformation. UNDP will also engage with leading digital organizations in the  regions to advocate for and collaborate on key issues.  Globally, UNDP will continue to participate and lead in relevant global and multistakeholder alliances, including the Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital  Cooperation and Our Common Agenda to bring insights and strengthen the  UN's role in protecting marginalized people. UNDP will also pursue partnerships  with global technology companies to access digital expertise and engage on  issues related to the responsible and sustainable use of technology. UNDP will  build coalitions such as working with digital rights-focused think tanks to create  participatory approaches that can hold stakeholders accountable.  The Chief Digital Office will provide overall leadership and serve as a focal point,  working with the Finance Sector Hub and Bureau for External Relations and  Advocacy (BERA) for a more systematic and coordinated approach across the  organization, for agile partnerships related to digital technologies. Clear communications and strategic advocacy are also critical enablers during digital  transformation. The Chief Digital Office will work in close collaboration with BERA to  develop coordinated, consistent, and compelling communications on UNDP’s digital work  both internally and externally to inspire people to engage and act to close the digital  divide in development. To bring more strategic coherence and greater efficiencies in the  digital communications ecosystem, UNDP will have a more robust and effective digital  communications governance. For external audiences, UNDP will continue to advocate for digital transformation  with governments and partners we work with and will increase efforts to raise general  awareness of digital development issues and nurture new strategic collaborations towards  a shared vision. The Digital Strategy's objectives will be strengthened via BERA's External  Engagement Strategy, which highlights how digital is amplifying the impact of UNDP's  work in priority areas including inequality, climate change and crisis. For internal UNDP audiences, communication will be key to driving a shared  understanding and common language, as well as sparking institutional change and  building momentum for continuous transformation at different stages. A rigorous,  compelling, and influential internal communications strategy will aid in this objective.  Digital communication platforms are critical for UNDP's global communications goals.  Ensuring that UNDP has up-to-date platforms and tools for its communication efforts will  continue to be an important part of its efforts to become a digitally native organization as  laid out in previous sections. 
#DigitalUNDP39 Measurement and reporting  The Digital Strategy will leverage existing measurement and reporting mechanisms in the  organization while developing new and modern methods to ensure tracking of progress  and success:    Leveraging existing mechanisms: The organization-wide adoption and  implementation of Digital by Default will provide measurement metrics that can  be fully integrated into UNDP's existing results reporting mechanisms, such as the  Results-Oriented Analysis Report (ROAR) and the Country Programme Document.  This effort will be guided and supported by the Chief Digital Office.  Alignment with Strategic Plan: Measurement metrics will also be closely aligned  with the Integrated Results and Resources Framework (IRRF) of the Strategic Plan  2022-2025, both on the high-level development outcomes and organizational  effectiveness and efficiency.  Agile measurement as needed: Given the fast speed of digital development,  flexible measures such as the "Objectives and Key Results" system, a  collaborative goal-setting methodology that is widely used in technology  companies and fit for quick iteration, could be considered, and other commonly  used agile metrics would be introduced as appropriate.
#DigitalUNDP40 Annex Assessment of progress to date  41 Current digital assets  43 Foresight for digital development  – Future scenarios  45 Glossary  48
#DigitalUNDP41 Assessment of progress to date The overall demand for digital support has significantly increased since 201949 and the COVID-19  pandemic has provided impetus for accelerating digital transformation.  This surge in demand is also echoed in the results of an interim reporting exercise conducted by  UNDP in September 202150 which tracks the reporting of UNDP’s programmatic and operational  responses to COVID-19.51 The analysis showed that UNDP adopted over 580 digital solutions in   82 countries, including 96 data collection systems, 71 e-commerce systems, 61 e-learning platforms,  and 149 e-governance systems. Further, digital solutions played a significant part in the development  of projects under the Rapid Financing Facility (RFF). One third (27 percent) of the overall 129  proposals focused on digital disruption and innovation. The RFF project, totalling US$104 million, was  established to catalyse UNDP’s “COVID 2.0” offer – Beyond Recovery: Towards 203052 which shows  the significance of digital solutions playing a part in UNDP’s COVID-19 response.  UNDP’s COVID-19 responses have taken a wide variety of forms, each tailored to the specific needs  of the relevant communities and country partners. In Rwanda, five robots donated by UNDP assisted  staff at two COVID-19 treatment centres in Kigali as well as the international airport, scanning  people for those who might be infected. UNDP also participated in robot deployment programmes  in Nepal53 and Viet Nam 54, where robots performed non-clinical tasks in hospital isolation wards. In  Tanzania, UNDP partnered with local stakeholders to 3D-print vital personal protective equipment  (PPEs) to support the pandemic response55. And in Singapore, UNDP’s Global Centre for Technology,  Innovation, and Sustainable Development launched an open-source digital toolkit to accelerate the  digital response to COVID-19.56  Beyond the response to the pandemic, the increasing number of support requests (299) addressed   to the Chief Digital Office as of October 2021 also illustrates the high demand for digital support across  UNDP. Ninety-four country offices (29 percent from the Regional Bureau for Africa (RBA), 27 percent from  the Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific (RBAP), 22 percent from the Regional Bureau for Europe  and the CIS (RBEC), 30 percent from the Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean (RBLAC),  and 9 percent from the Regional Bureau for Arab State (RBAS)) or UNDP business units (2 percent HQ)  received support ranging from ad hoc readiness assessments, general advisory, sourcing consultants/ vendors, technology expertise, and documentation review to other forms of digital support.57  An analysis of 52 newly approved Country Programme Documents (CPD) from 2019 to 2021 confirmed  a significant increase in digital adoption within government agreements. More than 50 percent of the  countries have anchored digital contexts, outcomes, and indicators in the country programmes and  respective resources and results frameworks (RRF) (see table below).  2019  2020  2021Digital adoption in CPDs With digital references in their programmesWith digital outcomes  as part of the RRF With digital indicators  as part of the RRF  20% 74% 37% 52% 100% 37% 56% This government partner-driven adoption is also mirrored in UNDP’s expanding use and implementation  of digital solutions, and the focus on data in UNDP work has increased. All regional bureaux have various  projects at different levels of maturity, led by the regional bureau or country office, that make use of  digital technology to facilitate and safeguard data exchange infrastructure to improve service provision,  and to use new sources of data to generate insights to close the digital divide. 
#DigitalUNDP42 On the operational side, new organizational and governance structures such as the Chief Digital  Office, Data Governance Group58, and Digital Governance Group59 have been established. In March  2020, UNDP approved an IT Strategy aligned with its digital transformation aspirations. This has  enabled the deployment of UNall60, and the new Quantum enterprise management platform61.  Other notable changes include the adoption of Digital by Default processes, the establishment of  new global digital partnerships, and additional core infrastructure central to digital transformation  such as the adoption of digital collaboration tools, the Data Futures Platform62 and the recently  deployed digital identity management framework63. However, this transformation has not been without its challenges.  These include issues such as  fragmentation of systems and data due to the decentralized nature of the organization, lack of a  strategic and consistent approach to the use of digital technology in programming, insufficient  digital and data literacy across UNDP, lack of digital skills for efficient use of tools and technology,  weak digitization and automation of services in procurement, HR, and other business processes as  well as programme reporting, and ongoing systems integration to serve our digital development  role in countries.  This snapshot of UNDP at present shows an organization in full transition. Clearly a significant  and much needed shift in UNDP’s digital approach and capabilities is underway, with a number  of challenges still present. Now is the time to build on this momentum to consolidate what has  been achieved thus far and push to ensure that UNDP can continue to be a leader in digital  development, capable of supporting its partners worldwide with relevant and agile digital support.  Given the current and emerging power of new technologies, the full achievement of the SDGs will  depend on the collective ability of UNDP and its partners globally to ensure that digital technology  is harnessed as a positive means to empower both people and planet. UNDP’s associated entities have also undergone  significant digital transformation. The United  Nations Volunteer Programme (UNV) has  strategically prioritized the undertaking of a Digital  Transformation leading to new organizational  capabilities to become the main global volunteer  organization for international peace and  development, and the first partner of choice for  cost-effective talent solutions in the UN System. For  example, UNV launched a corporate service desk  solution, supported by AI chatbots, self-service  knowledge articles, and an AI-powered case  engine. These AI-powered chatbots respond to  over 15,000 monthly inquiries, permitting UNV staff  to dedicate their time to higher complexity cases.  This solution was implemented in conceptual  synergy with UNDP’s UNall platform. UNV also launched the Unified Volunteering  Platform (UVP), which merged processes, systems,  and databases of previously separate Onsite and  Online assignments and candidates. Powered   by AI, it performs over 75,000 monthly longlisting  matches, supporting the work of UNV Recruiters  as well as Host Entities. Implementation of the  robotic process automation, which was made  possible by efficient collaboration between UNV  and UNDP teams, resulted in the removal of over  30,000 monthly manual actions related to Atlas  (ERP) operations. These efforts are taken within  the framework of the Quantum project. Case Study —  United Nations Volunteer Programme
#DigitalUNDP43 Current digital assets  UNDP has a number of existing assets that will continue to support the implementation of the  digital strategy. The table below is an indicative list of the diverse decentralized digital resources  across the organization that are meant to support digital programming. Capabilities and capacities Setup Description Chief Digital Office HQ The Chief Digital Office under the leadership of the Chief Digital Officer plays a  leadership role in the development and implementation of UNDP’s Digital Strategy.  Working across the organization, the Chief Digital Office will lead the development  of digital expertise; multi-sectoral and multi-division collaboration; digital  partnerships; knowledge management and communities of practice.  Accelerator Labs BPPS /  country  officesThe network of 91 labs established in 2019 covering 115 countries with approx.  273 designated staff members support local innovation and creates solutions that  are tailored to the local context. In many ways, the labs serve as an “engine” of  innovation and creativity at the country level, and fuel the decentralized digital  innovation and experimentation process, and have increased the data collection  across country offices.64 Global Finance Sector Hub BERA / BPPS Established in April 2019, the hub enables governments, the private sector, and  international financial institutions to accelerate financing for the the Sustainable  Development Goals. Network of Global Centres BPPS UNDP has a network of global centres, created in partnership with member states  on time-bound development priorities such as the Global Centre for Technology,  Innovation and Sustainable Development in Singapore and the Oslo Governance  Centre in Norway. The centres play critical roles in partnership with the Chief  Digital Office in testing and developing global offers on specific emerging areas  such as misinformation, smart cities and digital agriculture. These tests and  experimentation in collaboration with pilot country offices contribute significantly  to the advancement of the Digital Strategy 2022-2025 priority programmatic  initiatives and results.  Global Policy Network  (GPN)BPPS/CB The UNDP Global Policy Network (GPN) is a network of global experts and  practitioners, including on digital thematic areas, from local to global, currently  anchored by the Bureau for Policy and Programme Support (BPPS) and the Crisis  Bureau (CB). Both BPPS and the CB provide thematic guidance on strategic  applications of digital programming that help the organization stay ahead of the  growing digital divide. Supported by the Chief Digital Office, GPN will co-create  digital guides to help the organization be at the forefront of creating knowledge on  responsible digital approaches across UNDP’s programming work, collaborating  with countries to build on the successes of digital and inform the future direction of  thematic digital programming. Strategic Innovation Unit  (SIU)BPPS /  Regional  HubsThe Strategic Innovation Unit (SIU) leads the process of embedding innovation in  UNDP’s work, working closely with the GPN, Chief Digital Office, regional bureaux,  country offices, and other internal and external stakeholders. Information and  Technology Management  (ITM)BMS The Bureau for Management Services' (BMS) ICT division is responsible for  implementing the IT strategy and oversees the development and improvement of  UNDP’s ICT infrastructure. Regional centres or  regional advisors’ and  teamsRegional  hubsIn some cases, bureaux have established regional centres, digital lead roles or  hired external consultants with the bureaux to tackle a contextualised approach  towards digital transformation
#DigitalUNDP44 Digital Advocates Network Country  officesThe advocates are part-time champions for the digital transformation of UNDP.  The Digital Advocates Network is a community which promotes digital and builds  capacity through training and exchange of knowledge to further the digital maturity  of UNDP country offices. 120 people have been nominated and onboarded as of  November 2021, with one advocate in each country office, with around 30 percent  of advocates also being Accelerator Lab staff. Digital Committees Country  officesDigital Committees have been established at the country level for programming  including thematic, innovation and operations members. ICT Manager Network Country  officesA decentralized network of ICT managers which conducts exchanges on a  frequent basis with the aim of achieving alignment on IT best practices across the  organization to ensure that all staff have access to and know how to utilize IT tools  and solutions to support their work. Digital Communicators  NetworkCountry  officesA network of communications practitioners from across UNDP country offices and  regional bureaux, led by BERA (Bureau for External Relations and Advocacy). UNCDF Global,  Regional  and Country  offices UNCDF with its capital mandate and focus on Least Developed Countries (LDCs)  has core flagship offers of inclusive digital economies and local transformative  finance tools and knowledge. This includes the Inclusive Digital Economy  Scorecard (IDES) and the Better Than Cash Alliance led UN Principles for  Responsible Digital Payments.  UNOSSC Global The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC) promotes,  coordinates and supports South-South and triangular cooperation globally and  within the United Nations System, including on digital transformation and digital  innovations. Its online platform, South-South Galaxy, enables knowledge-sharing  and partnership-brokering between the Global South.  UNV Global The United Nations Volunteers (UNV) programme contributes to peace and  development through volunteerism worldwide. It has over 6,000 UN Volunteer  and Online Volunteer talent pool candidates specialized in data science, machine  learning, business intelligence and adjoint subjects. Internally, UNV has a  dedicated team - the extended UNV Digital Transformation project team - to drive  digital transformation within UNV.
#DigitalUNDP45 Foresight for digital development  – Future scenarios The trajectory along which the world is moving with respect to digital technologies is unpredictable  and constantly evolving. To be at the forefront of digital development, UNDP continuously considers  the multiple, divergent ways in which the world could evolve. This understanding of the possible  future scenarios in the medium term (5-20 years), and factors that could shape and define the  international development and humanitarian contexts, informs UNDP’s approach to harnessing digital  for better development outcomes. Together with the Institute for the Future, UNDP has explored several scenarios for the future of digital  technology and its impact on development. Given UNDP’s ambition for digital to be an empowering  force for people and planet, the scenarios are intended to spark thoughts and discussions as to the  evolving role of UNDP. What emerges from these exercises is the sense that digital technology is at a crossroads. The  utopian ‘connect the world’ view has started to fade in the face of disturbing and increasingly urgent  challenges which are ever harder to overlook. It is beyond the scope of this strategy to explore these  issues in great detail, but there are key themes to consider.  The impact of digital on human rights is stark; discriminatory algorithms, invasions of privacy and  cybercrime are just some of the examples that are top of the agenda today. The digitally supported  changes in information ecosystems have led to the near collapse of public interest media in many  contexts, rampant "information pollution", declining trust in governance institutions, and serious  challenges to both democratic political processes and evidence-driven public policy. As digital  technology has ever greater impact on rights and inclusion, UNDP must ensure that human rights  remain central to its digital work.  With poverty reduction at its core, UNDP will always be keenly interested in the impact of new  technology on this problem. Here we see a sharper bifurcation of possible futures: as automation  promises to eliminate many jobs, a flowering of digital occupations may be the counterbalance.  Understanding and harnessing this workplace revolution, and its impact on poverty and inequality,   will be critical to UNDP’s mission. In all scenarios, issues such as the extent of commitment to sustainability, the relative power of tech  companies, the capacity of national governments, the shifting digital divide on a spectrum, the impact  of rapid automation, and erosion of trust are major features. However, in all scenarios a digitally  transformed, resilient, and agile UNDP is necessary to ensure that benefits of tech are maximized,  while risks and potential harms are mitigated. As with all future planning, the element of uncertainty is  extremely high. The scenarios outlined are by no means the only possibilities, nor do they represent  UNDP’s view on what will happen.  Foresight work will continue to be an important practice for UNDP to ensure that we are as ready for  the future as it is possible to be, and that we are able to support our partners to be resilient in the face  of continued, accelerating digital change. This foresight work is based on the Alternative Futures65 methodology, the core of which is in the  development and understanding of alternative future scenarios according to four major archetypes: • Continued growth: a future with an acceleration of the current trajectory,    including the current problems • Collapse: a future with the system collapsing due to one or a variety of reasons • Discipline: a future with society organized around one overarching topic of sustainability • Transformation: a future of a radical change due to a redefining phenomenon or event
#DigitalUNDP46 Scenario I       “On the same trajectory”       Continued growth archetype In this future we see much more of what we have in the present - similar problems, increased in scope  and scale. • Technology is advancing at a great pace, but only benefits a few groups in society. There is a huge  digital divide with many communities pushed further behind. • Tech companies have more power than governments or nation states - they shape laws and civic  engagement in most places, and they impact local public agendas and discourse. • Small businesses survive if working on the large tech platforms, but their data and that of their  customers is mined for profit. • Many jobs are automated, driving huge changes for wealthy nations, while low- and middle-income  countries are now included in the global mega-marketplace platforms, which threatens local  livelihoods. • People are even more connected, distracted, and divided. Disinformation and misinformation are rife.  No one knows what to believe and trust in institutions is at an all-time low. • Algorithms developed and pushed by Big Tech and social media companies decide which  environmental issues get attention, and therefore action, and humanity's efforts are even more  scattered and contradictory. We are not reversing planetary damage because economies and big  business are still wired for growth at all costs. Climate disasters accelerate, driving more instability,  fear, and conflict. • Resilience is low amongst the countries. Due to the constant fight with volatility and scarcity, the  developing countries that UNDP serves are more adaptable than the previously more stable western  nations. There are bright spots where communities are using digital technology in highly innovative  ways to solve local problems.  Humanity is solving some of our problems faster, but also making critical problems bigger.  Scenario II      “Falling into the abyss”      Collapse archetype In this future, most systems in the world reach their limit, quickly spin out of control and collapse. • Elites push society toward instability with inadequate allocation of resources and wealth. Inequality  and disproportionate allocation prevail. • Even when paired with rapid and uncontrolled technological development and adoption, economic  conditions and standards of living deteriorate over many years. With a sudden failure of our major  systems the world becomes economically unstable with lots of frustration, fear, and social anxiety. • Rapid automation leaves a lot of people without work and means to live. The pace of re-skilling and  retraining cannot keep pace with automation. • The population growth is explosive. It leads to the depletion of natural resources. The rate of  pollution is unprecedented. The world does not seem to be a sustainable place to live. • Migration or relocation due to political/climate/economic crises becomes an ungovernable challenge. • Technology growth and governance are chaotic and unmanageable. Dangerous innovations emerge  with a possibility for an AI takeover. • The Internet is a dark place full of misinformation and fakes. Blurred lines between real and artificial  brings about a collapse in trust. • There is no clear-cut delineation of power. The world is on the way towards global political impasse,  resulting in an overwhelming sense of insecurity and hopelessness. Communities reorganize into  smaller hubs with more local governance and creative autonomy.  Humanity falls into a rabbit hole of problems and challenges with no light at the end of the tunnel.
#DigitalUNDP47 Scenario III     “Radical new norm”     Transformation archetype In this future the world has undergone a huge transformation. Life as we know it has changed radically. • After a complete collapse in trust - in institutions, in media, in science, in each other - the people of  the world have focused strongly inward on their closest communities. • Nation-states and large societies broke down and then reformed in smaller, tightly-held groups.  People live in these smaller groups, rarely exposed to other people. • Travel has slowed completely, food is local and seasonal, and a renaissance in local business and  community becomes the norm. • Areas with productive land, clean water and stable weather are highly sought after, driving local  conflict. These areas change often due to climate instability. • Large parts of the Earth have become barely liveable. New high-tech cities are popping up, ones  that produce their own water, power and are able to lock themselves off from sandstorms and other  facets of climate change. • There was a complete shift away from oligarchic capitalism and the gap between the wealthy few  and everyone else on the planet is getting smaller. • Democracy is over. Power is owned by the corporations with the technology people want. New  forms of collectivism and governance are emerging within the larger, more popular communities.  There, new ways of living together are being formed. • The world of work has transformed dramatically. There are very few paid jobs, and most  communities run on the voluntary effort of their community members. Humanity has a new set of problems to solve. Exciting new ways to live together are emerging, while  power is with both the corporations and the people. Scenario IV     “In pursuit of sustainability”     Discipline archetype  In this future, global society strives to find equilibrium after a series of dramatic or traumatic shocks  and events. Pursuing sustainability becomes a long and arduous movement that finally gains a lot of  traction. • Humanity honours the limits of all vital resources and builds a system where the needs of the  present can be met without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. • Driven by a cultural shift, there is common agreement that balancing economic growth with social  inclusion and environmental protection can be a recipe for a sustainable world. • Minor crises are happening from time to time, but resilient societies can bounce back quickly from  crises that would have crippled the fragile systems of the past. Countries have been reinforcing  safeguards such as inclusion, trust, competition, security, and privacy. It made them adaptable and  protected from risks. • Funds are shared between governments and citizens, and universal services and public goods are  provisioned. • Automation is smartly used to relieve human drudge. The jobs are fairly and equally paid. • Humans and AI complement each other which opens new opportunities for economic growth,  production, health care, education, communication, and transportation. • The world negotiates and finds agreement on technology and data governance. More and more  states and societies have AI and robotics regulations. Ethical and responsible use of technology for  societal good is the default. Humanity seeks equilibrium and explores ways to live a sustainable life. Some new challenges arise,  and the world is committed to finding solutions which will benefit all. 
#DigitalUNDP48 Data guiderails: A repository of articles and tools to help demystify all things data related.  That includes topics like data ingestion, usage, storage, sharing, privacy, visualization – as  well as basic information like UNDP’s standard list of countries. Digital: We define digital as:  • An ever-evolving range of technologies (like mobile technologies, artificial  intelligence, machine learning, blockchain, Internet of Things, and robotics to  name a few) that impact nearly all aspects of our world.  • A mindset, which translates into a new way of working that enables people and  institutions to innovate with technology. Digitalization: Defined in the development context, it is the process of using digital  (technology, tools, processes, solutions) for greater operational impact, as well as for the  internal transformation of an organization. Digital / Digitally enabled / Digitally-informed programming: Embedding digital  technologies and approaches into design, implementation, and deployment of projects  and programmes at the national, regional, and global level.  Digital by Default / Digital-First approach: A way of thinking and behaving, which  embeds digital as a standard for project and programme delivery. Digital ecosystem: A complex and dynamic interconnected network of actors and  systems, all of which function as a unit to create an enabling environment for digital to  advance economic and societal efforts.  National digital ecosystem: A healthy digital ecosystem at the national level would have  the following characteristics: • Long-term vision and strategy for national leadership and local ownership • Solid foundational layers such as digital infrastructure • An enabling environment with the right policy, talent, and investment • A process to reach and engage different stakeholders across sectors, including  marginalized groups. Digital inclusion: An approach to close divides in access to and use of digital  technologies. A practice which ensures that all individuals and communities, including  the most disadvantaged, are aware of, have access to, and use/are able to use  information and communication technologies as well as needed, relevant, and safe  digital content and services. Digital mindset: A set of attitudes, beliefs, and behaviours that enable people to  understand the opportunities and risks of digital technologies, and to apply them to their  everyday lives.Glossary
#DigitalUNDP49 Digitally native: For an institution, that means using and understanding how technology  influences and impacts the lives of people. Can be used in the same context as digitally  enabled or digitally savvy.  Digital revolution: A multifaceted, fast moving, and disruptive set of changes that  fundamentally transforms the way people live, work, do business, socialize and interact, and  how society functions because of the exponential pace of technological advancements. Digital society: A society in which digital technologies are coiled with the physical and  have become completely bound up with everyday life. Inclusive digital society: A society in which all people have the right to affordable  technologies and have reasonably priced broadband to access the digital realm. Digital solution: A solution that incorporates the use of digital technology to solve a  problem. Digital technology: The systems, hardware and processes that use digital data or signals  to achieve defined outcomes.  Digital transformation: The integration of digital technology into all areas of business,  fundamentally changing how economic and social activities are enacted. It is also a social  change process that is purposeful, rather than unregulated, and should be intentionally  planned and executed.  Inclusive / People-centred digital transformation: An approach that puts people at the  centre of digital transformation efforts to ensure a more open, transparent, and accessible  process. For UNDP, inclusive digital transformation: • Addresses the needs of the poorest as well as the most vulnerable and  marginalized groups, including women and people with disabilities • Mitigates the tendency of digital transformation to exacerbate existing inequalities  • Empowers underrepresented groups to take part in meaningful ways • Protects people from the adverse effects of digital technologies • Encourages the use and development of digital technology that is open,  responsible, and rights-based.  Future foresight/Horizon scanning: The early detection and assessment of how different  trends might shape the future landscape of development efforts. Scaling: Mainstream adoption of proven digital approaches. This could include  geographic expansion, scaling impact at the policy level or scaling the incentive structures  for the long term. Whole-of-society approach: Bringing together all parts of society to shape digital  transformation in a country or region, including but not limited to governments, private  sector, civil society, academia, and citizens. It is a process built on shared responsibility,  ownership, inclusion, transparency and representation.
#DigitalUNDP50 1 Note that where UNDP is discussed throughout this document  it also refers to associated entities including the United  Nations Volunteers programme, the United Nations Office  for South-South Cooperation, and the United Nations Capital  Development Fund (UNCDF), which all will continue to have  a significant impact on the digital future of UNDP and its work  around the world.   2 https://digitalstrategy.undp.org/ 3 For example, Bangladesh since the mid 2000’s, https://www. bd.undp.org/content/bangladesh/en/home/projects/access-toinformation--phase-2.html 4 The Accelerator Lab network is a network of 91 labs  established in 2019, covering 115 countries to support local  innovation 5 The Digital Advocates Network is a community which promotes  digital and builds capacity through training and exchange of  knowledge to further the digital maturity of UNDP country  offices 6 The Chief Digital Office under the leadership of the Chief  Digital Officer is responsible for leading the development and  implementation of UNDP’s Digital Strategy 7 Secretary-General’s Roadmap for Digital Cooperation,  Accessed 27/10/21, https://www.un.org/en/content/digitalcooperation-roadmap/ 8 Our Common Agenda, Accessed 27/10/21, https://www.un.org/ en/un75/common-agenda 9 https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-strategicplan-2022-2025 10 The Strategic Innovation Unit (SIU) leads the process of  embedding innovation in UNDP’s work 11 The World Bank has identified 300 government and private  sector initiatives around the world in which COVID-19 response  encompasses actions on digital ICT infrastructure and digital  services for health, education and payments: https://blogs. worldbank.org/digital-development/covid-19-were-trackingdigital-responses-worldwide-heres-what-we-see 12 https://ipcig.org/sites/default/files/pub/en/OP465_Mobile_ payment_and_application_systems_for_COVID_19.pdf 13 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2020. pdf 14 ITU, Economic Impact of COVID-19 on Digital Infrastructure 15 ITU, Economic Impact of COVID-19 on Digital Infrastructure 16 The Mobile Gender Gap Report 2021, Accessed 24 January  2022, https://www.gsma.com/r/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/ The-Mobile-Gender-Gap-Report-2021.pdf 17 https://web-assets.bcg. com/5f/6b/0e4a89ba4b3ab751cba5134935bc/bcg-a-2-trillionplan-to-bring-two-billion-more-people-into-the-digital-agesep-2020.pdf 18 https://science.sciencemag.org/content/359/6380/1146.fullEndnotes 19 Pathways to Prosperity: https://pathwayscommission.bsg. ox.ac.uk/digital-roadmap and UNCTAD Digital Economy  Report, Accessed 12 March 2021: https://unctad.org/system/ files/official-document/der2019_en.pdf 20 Digital ecosystem refers to a complex and dynamic  interconnected network of actors and systems, all of which  function as a unit to create an enabling environment for digital  to advance economic and societal efforts 21 https://www.undp.org/publications/undp-strategicplan-2022-2025 22 https://www.undp.org/six-signature-solutions 23 https://www.un.org/en/content/digital-cooperation-roadmap/ 24 https://www.un.org/en/un75/common-agenda 25 https://www.un.org/en/about-us/un-charter 26 https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-ofhuman-rights 27 https://digitalprinciples.org/ 28 https://www.responsiblepayments.org/ 29 https://digitalpublicgoods.net/ 30 A whole-of-society approach brings together all parts of  society to shape digital transformation in a country or region,  including but not limited to governments, private sector,  civil society, academia, and citizens. It is a process built on  shared responsibility, ownership, inclusion, transparency and  representation. 31 https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda 32 https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/ the-paris-agreement 33 https://www.undp.org/careers/people-2030 34 Digital ecosystem refers to a complex and dynamic  interconnected network of actors and systems, all of which  function as a unit to create an enabling environment for digital  to advance economic and societal efforts 35 EY Assessment of UNDP’s Digital Strategy 2019-2021,  Available in the Annex. 36 Digital Public Goods – such as open-source software, open  data, open AI models, open standards, and open content that  do no harm – can serve as accelerators for national digital  transformation and equitable growth while strengthening  inclusion and human rights. 37 At the time of writing, over 30 requests have been received  via UNDP Country Offices since 2020 38 The early detection and assessment of how different trends  might shape the future landscape of development efforts 39 https://www.undp.org/sites/g/files/zskgke326/files/undp/ library/corporate/jobs/People-for-2030.pdf 40 The Knowledge Management Strategy is currently under  discussion as of November, 2021
#DigitalUNDP51 41 This is partly in response to comments received in the UNDP  Partner Survey 2020 suggesting that capacity can sometimes  be an issue. 42 https://data.undp.org/ 43 This is in response to UNDP Partner Survey 2020, where some  partners shared feedback that UNDP was overly bureaucratic  and placed more emphasis on procedures than priorities of  recipient institutions. 44 The Data Governance Group, led by the Data Team consisting  of the Chief Digital Office, Global Policy Network, and  Information and Technology Management (ITM), supports the  development and implementation of UNDP’s Data Strategy.  It provides guidance on data policies and helps resolve data  issues. It is chaired by the Chief Digital Officer. 45 The Executive Group is UNDP’s highest internal governing  body and is responsible for strategic leadership and  management of the organization. 46 The Organizational Performance Group advises on key  priorities for operational policy and procedures.  47 It should be noted that in a number of cases, Bureaux already  partly or fully drive digital execution 48 https://www.iftf.org/fileadmin/user_upload/downloads/vantage/ IFTF_Vantage_FutureReadinessPlaybook.pdf 49 Digital Transformation Survey, October 2021 Q5 – Over 75  percent noted noticed a significant (41 percent) or moderate  (35 percent) increase in level of demand from partners for  support on digital solutions over the past 2-3 years. 50 2nd Mini-ROAR Analysis -Results, Lessons Learned and Future  Demand September 2020 – September 2021 51 This includes including RRFs, RFFs and JSB 52 Rapid Financing Facility: Report of the Investment Group, Jan  2021 53 https://www.np.undp.org/content/nepal/en/home/presscenter/ articles/2020/robots-for-recovery.html 54 New Robotic applications help protect frontline health workers,  Accessed 19/11/21, https://www.vn.undp.org/content/vietnam/ en/home/presscenter/articles/Robots.html 55 https://www.tz.undp.org/content/tanzania/en/home/blog/ PPE3DprintingtofightCOVID19inTanzania.html 56 https://sgtechcentre.undp.org/content/sgtechcentre/en/home/ featured-work/digital-tools-for-covid-19.html 57 Country office Support dashboard (October 2021). 58 The Data Governance Group, led by the Data Team consisting of  the Chief Digital Office, Global Policy Network, and Information  and Technology Management (ITM), supports the development  and implementation of UNDP’s Data Strategy. It provides  guidance on data policies and helps resolve data issues.  59 The Digital Governance Group, led by the Chief Digital Office  with organization wide representation, helps UNDP to leverage  digital technology and innovation to deliver results on the  ground, and to better understand the trade-offs and risks that  come with these opportunities 60 UNall is UNDP’s new Service Portal where all staff will be able  to report issues, ask questions and find information related  to corporate IT, Human Resource, Finance, Procurement and  General operation services61 Quantum will replace ATLAS as UNDP’s new ERP management  system by end of 2022 62 UNDP Data Futures Platform, Accessed 1/11/21, https://data. undp.org/ 63 UNDP Digital Identity Management Framework,  Accessed 12/11/2021, https://undp.sharepoint.com/teams/ collaborationtoolbox/SitePages/IDAM_Launch_webinars-26_ October_2021.aspx 64 https://acceleratorlabs.undp.org/ 65 Dunagan, Jake. A Methodological Interlude: Alternative Futures  and Deductive Forecasting, Accessed 18/11/21, https://www. iftf.org/future-now/article-detail/a-methodological-interludealternative-futures-and-deductive-forecasting/
#DigitalUNDP52 digitalstrategy.undp.org  United Nations Development Programme One United Nations Plaza New York, NY 10017 www.undp.org © UNDP 2022
